Starting...
Loaded the model...
 Yes, we'll pick up the heat as we go along. So I think we'll probably just start with the more or less the themes that we covered. So I'll follow them. Let's start with Hydra stuff. So we didn't cover Hydra, but I believe Sasha won't tell us what files stuff is in. We probably won't do that. So let's start with changelog writers. I think you mentioned those. Changelog writers are basically not a part of Hydra. Oh, no. Changelog writers or journal writers? Actually, well, isn't it... Two very different things. Why? Because the journal writer is a part of a native file. Yes. And changelog writers are part of Hydra. But don't we have local... Yes. Okay. We can take a look at them. So we have basically local change... Lookup. Change local store. Which basically returns... I change local store factory class. Which is... So it's basically a factory that you can lock in order to make sure that you're the only one who is working with this changelog store. And it will return your changelog store basically that allows you, for example, to get the index of the latest changelog. Or create changelog. Or open changelog. Or remove a changelog. And some things like that. And there are two implementations to this, right? Yes. So there is a local changelog store factory that is basically directory-based. It could have some directory and a number of files stored there. And there is a remote changelog store that basically... Oh, I forgot. Oh, I see. There is a directory. Yeah. I don't know if you can see it. I think it's the directory. There's a directory. So if you open the directory you'll see a directory. So you can see that you have a directory. And the directory is actually a file source. And you can see here, if you open a directory, you can see that there is a directory. And if you open a directory, you can see that there's a directory. I have a number of file stores there. And there is a remote changelog store that basically takes a native client and creates journals in a specific directory of Cypher. The complicated journal code lives inside this one. No, the complicated journal code lives in journal writer and journal chunk writer. I mean, but it's... So basically, changelog store, remote changelog store inside uses journal writer, or is it the other way around? No, like the remote changelog store creates journal writer. Yes, okay. That's what I... And then journal writer, I think, is... Is a part of a native... Yes. And a lot of complicated style basically lives here. Yes. That one is pretty... Like all the quorum indices, chunk relocation, barriers for automizer, and many, many other things. Okay. So in terms of master, but in terms of master, the changelog store is basically like five... It's like a file manipulation or... What do you mean? I mean that like Hydra commits mutations. Yes. And then we just write them to like... The local changelog store does, I don't know, like batching and stuff like that, right? Yes. So, I mean, I guess it's... It doesn't do much... It's file changelog. It's actually pretty much code, but... Why? You have to be careful. Like you should have proper barriers. There are a lot of actually various safety guards with various checksums and something like that. Also, there is a file changelog index. Why do we have chunk fragment reads for changelogs? You can guess why. I don't know. I don't know. Or file changelog. Yes. And guess why. You should be able to guess why. Like why do we have chunk fragment read request method in file changelog? I understand why we might have it for journals. Okay. And now we need to make one step further. Spoiler. No. No. No. No. No. Because remote changelogs are baked by local changelogs. Like when you are writing a journal, your local replicas and data nodes are implemented by local changelog. So once you want to read a set of hunks from a journal chunk, you make a chunk fragment read request, uses the data nodes. And locally you have to somehow read these small pieces of file changelog. And, by the way, why do we actually have to read hunks from journal files? Like wasn't the idea that we have hunks storage? Yes. Oh, but hunks storage uses journal files. Yes. Hunks storage is basically like journals with steroids. Yeah. Yeah. It's still a pen-only structure, but with a lot of different sheets. So basically, HunkStorage uses journal chunks, and then we put refs to HunkStorage in real journals. Like, if you have a table that uses HunkStorage, we write to it, and we write to HunkStorage first, which is kind of journal chunks on some of it. And then we put refs to these hunks into tablet cell change logs, which are also journal chunks. So, yes, journal chunks reference other journal chunks. Yes. Nice. Okay. I guess that is fine. Back to Hydra. So I was curious where, like, I guess, there are a bunch of files regarding mutations and, I guess, snapshots. And where is, like, the fork stuff happening? Fork stuff happens in gap latency. Let me see. This will be the user� nose and don't lined. Undecorate it. Well, Thank you. So basically it's a part of a decorated automaton. And there is TFork executor or TFork snapshot builder. That is used in case if your automaton forks. And there is also TNoFork snapshot builder in case if your automaton doesn't fork, like tablet cells or clocks. Mm-hmm. And so I remember we had all of this logic about the TNoFork had like, I don't know, sync and async. Oh, Duran sync and Duran async. Yeah, but I actually think it is, in theory, it's possible for both of them. Like in theory, you may use... I think part of a snapshot in a fork executor. It like doesn't make a lot of sense, but you can do that. Can you say that? Okay. And we call this stuff from, I guess, just from, we can call it from automaton. Yes. So basically like say, like, you basically like automaton consists of a number of parts. Yes. And each part... may have like save, save async, blah blah blah method, like save keys, save values, save async methods. And when you register an automaton part, it is picked up like it just stores and decorates that automaton and basically like save, save async or decorate automaton is a number of saves of its parts. And so save async is the one that is present in tablet. Yeah, I do tablet. I draw. Yes. So in the most of the automaton parts. Then elections. It's kind of like it's both simple and not very the distributed election manager that is used coupled with Hydra for masters. And I'm not like very familiar with that. And the other yeah, the civil Hydra manager is also a huge Hydra manager is basically like most of the Hydra stuff except for election. So just do the Hydra manager use elections in order to understand like whether you are leader or follower. Like most of the different Hydra logic is here. Yeah, basically, like if your this file is useful if you're looking at what is going on with hydroized? I don't know something restarting this. opinions this Okay, recovering why do you mean? So well, just in general like is the I think we have such a magari Rickonur Schaus, For the birthday of the Head разработer. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I think the is the, is a guitar player. The Aufgabe isUNP, veropartner, marketing adventurous, I think that means a lot. But again, in which context it is absolute news. And, as I already said, you should to remain in bag. But also literally introducing the ruch. True and it becomes like an pusher instead of PHP or pro Power Karolchood. I think we have some code to follow recovery. For example, some things are done differently in recovery, right? Not in recovery. Most of this lives here. Okay. And all of these states follow recovery. So, draft state machine mostly lives here. Okay. And kind of in between Kyder and everything else, maybe we can look at some mutation, like, mutations in general. Like, I think the whole pass. So, there is, like, how do you add a new mutation? And what is the kind of, like, just how does it look in code? You can look, for example, at the tablet service. The easiest one. So, basically, here is the handler of writeRPCPol. There is still some compile from a few years ago. So, basically, let me find it. And writeRPCPol is really difficult to do withdaily function. To comparesthat, it can get a little bit clean yourself. It's not the best example. But something works. Okay. like that. So we let me actually find something better for it. Because I remember when I was adding related, it's always kind of confusing, to say the least, to kind of find where stuff like this starts. We'll look at expert chunks, for example. Yes. So basically create. Yes. So it's mostly like that. Yes. And basically, mutations have handlers, which are usually called hydra, blah, blah, blah, blah. And well, they do stuff. And we scheduled these mutations. I think we just saw the code. Yes. So here we commit and commit and reply, in case if your mutation applies to something. And how wait. So you commit and reply is so we can get something. Like the mutation can return some result. And we can reply with that result. Yes. OK. So internally, it's probably just the edge of the waste for it to be applied. Yes. So if you have a look at the hydra expert chunks, it takes actually both request and response to parameters and the context of RPC requests in some cases. And you basically have a request and filter the response. Mm-hmm. Right. There is quite a variety of 2013-old I will not explain it in too much. I will just say it's a pretty good example related to it. At first, this doesn't always happen. But of course, work with the toggle switch. . . couple. Don't know what thread. Yeah, they're like mutation. Some things might be important in terms of like a large mutation queue, but the directory is understandable. Change one discovery key. That is interesting, actually. Let's move to object stuff. So transaction management, master. Management and master. Like in general. So there are actually a bunch of things like this. Because there is like transaction, for example, there is at least transaction coordinator. No, it's separate. This is like a huge file responsible for... Transaction management and master. And here by transactions, we mostly mean like master transactions that are typically not to PC, but like the transactions that are replicated by Hive across the cells. There is like a lot of different stuff. Yeah. Okay. So for example, some logic about, I don't know, like auto abort of the transaction in case if your parent commits something like management of the transaction tree. Reference of some like... Yeah, actually, we didn't discuss it during transactions. And I don't remember. So if you have nested transactions... Yeah. You can get a parent transaction. What actually happens. All the sub-tree gets aborted. So it's aborted. Yeah. There is a lot of code here. And like, I don't know, this manager also handles pings. Sorry? Like who handles pings? Actually, I remember there's some pings somewhere. A lot of pings. Yeah. A lot of like... Actually, yes. Actually, there is a thing that is called list tracker. No, not this. Transaction list tracker. It's a part of the transaction supervisor. But it's used, I think, in many different places. For example, I think Master has a separate one. Okay. This is weird. Okay. So the transaction supervisor is a generic class for... I think it just lives here for some reason. But actually, like, there is a part of the sensitive coupling. Like, there is transaction supervisor and transaction manager. And the transaction supervisor is a generic two-phase commute machinery. And it's like transaction manager is typically implemented for different kinds of cells differently. Transaction manager over master is what we saw before. And transaction manager and tablet nodes is a completely separate thing. Okay. So, basically, it's a separate entity. And actually, the transaction manager is a point where you want to handle the ping timeouts. Because transaction supervisor is a two-phase commute protocol. So, basically, the only thing that transaction supervisor is doing is calling various methods for a transaction manager of different cells in the right order. Okay. So, like, transaction manager implements what does it mean to prepare or commit transaction. And also, transactions as entities also live within a transaction manager. So, it's the responsibility of a transaction manager to automatically, like, abort transactions that are expired. So... So, lease tracker lives inside... Like, in reality, it's supposed to live inside transaction manager. Transaction manager. Yeah. So, we can take a look at, for example, tablet node transaction manager. And they hope to see a lease tracker here. Yes. Okay. And since we're here, the whole, like... So, master... Does master have 2PC? Sometimes. For example, for, like, update dynamic... Update tablet source, for example. 2PC with tablet cells. Yes. Yes. Does master ever have 2PC? Yes. Does master have 2PC inside itself? I think we... Like, across various cells of a month? Master cells. I think it is true in SQLWire. Because the creation of SQLWire object is a 2PC that affects a number of master cells and a number of tablet cells. Just a few master cells involved in 2-phase commits. I'm not really sure if it happened. Because master is built in transaction replication paradigm. Like... There is no 2-phase commits. There is just a transaction coordinator who replicates the commits and aborts various cells. Um... It's something kind of like... Can we maybe... Since... I think it's important to look at at least, like, one example of something being replicated. Maybe for transactions it might be hard to find. Because I remember... So we have the set repli... We discussed set replicated. But that's a completely different thing. Because that's for... Yes. When you add... No. Transaction replication happens just in... Actually in object service, I think. So there is a stage of... Yeah. Like... Check sub requests for remote transactions. And it's basically a code that tries to understand which transactions are being involved in some request. Either read or write. And before execution of this request, you have to replicate this transaction to the cell. So... So this is a primary master thing. And we look at what transactions are relevant for this request. Yes. And we... We have to, like, actively replicate them to the required... Yes. Yes. So they are replicated on demand. Mm-hmm. And how does this... Can you point to actual transactions being, like... What do you call... I don't think this is... So there is a create replication transactions mutation. And there is a hide or replicate transactions method. And basically, like... Let me find that. There's a replicate transaction method. Which calls externalize or replicate transaction. What's the difference between externalize or replicate transactions? I have no idea. Sounds like almost the same thing. Maybe because... Can it be because... This be because of transaction? No. Like, what does it separate transaction coordinator? Is it 2PC stuff only? Sorry? I'm saying, like, can... Like, can transactions live on... Can transactions be externalized? Because, I mean, externalize is a word for moving to another... To, like, to a portal cell, right? It looks like it's another kind of... It looks like it's another kind of... Overloaded word. Let me try to understand. Yeah, there's also foreign transactions. Which... Technical... External transaction... I think, like, foreign is, like, either replicated or externalized. What the fuck is externalized? You have made some problem. Yeah,. It's, like, moveable. You can fix it now? Yeah. mouths during a七 Yes. So basically, post-for-intransaction starts is a high message standing. So you just send to the cell a message like... Yeah. You need to know where this transaction is. Yes. So now you have this transaction. It is managed by you. Okay. I want to see some code. Let's see. Here. So this is obviously... Oh, I remember the word boomerang. I guess we... It's some shitty word. Yeah, but it is important only if you have transaction coordinators separate. Yes, so transaction separate, transaction coordinator is for 2PC. No. No. It's for regular commits also. Then one does the transaction... Okay. So we have transaction manager. Yeah. We also have transaction... Yeah. Transaction. So is it a transaction coordinator, which you said does... No. Like typically, if you have just a regular master transaction, the 2PC just replicated one, there is one cell that coordinates it in a sense that it is a point where it's decided whether the transaction should be aborted or permitted or... And typically, this is a primary cell. What is externalized? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Like start transaction call... For... Forever. Like this is a... Yes. And the idea is like, if you have a single transaction coordinator, you cannot claim like truly horizontally flooded masters because like you have a number of portals, but each transaction that only affects some portal... Yeah. It's still coordinated by primary master, so primary master is still a bottleneck. Okay. So you may have a set of cells that are coordinated. So transaction coordinators can be multiple cells? Yes. And they will just charge transactions between them somehow? Yes. Okay. Probably there is like some locality ideas that if you, for example, want to perform something transactional beyond the portal, probably you want that cell to coordinate this transaction. But then it has to have this role. I think so. I think so. But I don't remember this exactly. And so isn't it like... Because before, everything related to secondary cells, like primary master, kind of like it... It's part of the process of like external cell tag. Yes. Is something that is decided usually on primary, right? What do you mean? I mean like if I... Or actually, this is important. Like when I'm creating, I have like multiple chunk cells. Okay. And I am like creating a new table. Ah, yeah. So external tag is determined by what is called native cell. Yes. And native cell is a primary in the world without portals. Yes. And in case of portals, it's basically like the cell where like your table, like your Cypress parts of a table lives. Yes. And they selected like somehow like kind of randomly with some weights, a sink across all the chunk host for rolled cells. Yes, but with transactions, like in the clients... Yes. But with transactions, like in the clients and back again in the secure– you call start transaction. Yes, and you can provide... It will be either determined at random in native clients, or you can explicitly provide a self-coordinate. And then basically the coordinator is embedded in, well, I mean, cell tag or whatever. Yes, yes, yes. So you have a cell tag of the transaction coordinator and transaction ID. Basically the owner, like the ultimate owner of this object. Okay. So that's transaction coordinators. But also the same class... I'm trying to understand like the hierarchy of the implementation, because you said that like 2PC style, who does 2PC style? Is it the same class or just... No, 2PC style is transaction supervisor. Ah, supervisor. And it is shared across the cells. It's a single implementation across the cell. And transaction manager is specific for every kind of a cell. So we have transaction manager, transaction coordinator, and transaction supervisor. At least three. But like transaction coordinator is not a piece of code. It's a role. And transaction manager and transaction supervisor, they're both our classes. And basically the stuff that is like the role of transaction coordinator implies that you do like transaction manager is the one that does stuff. The stuff can be applied by this role, right? Yes. Yes. Makes sense. Okay. Maybe while we are here, can we let's maybe look at some 2PC stuff? Like just... Not here. Like there is a transaction manager, but there is a transaction supervisor. So I think like it's good to look at an example of how... Oh, wow. There was no such thing when I was working on this. Cool. Okay. And there's Sequoia word here. Sequoia transactions. Of course. All this stuff. What do you want to... I think like it's important to look at just as one example of some 2PC. It can be, for example, I don't know, mount, like some simple... Mount is not 2PC. Mount is not 2PC. Update tablet stores. Okay. Because... Because mount is a higher-applicated message. And like the idea is that tablet itself cannot deny mount. Okay. Like the Hive message is not a question. It's like obligation. And yes. Let me have a look. I need to find something like that. Hide or commit update tablet stores. Here we come. Here we come. Update tablet stores. So, yeah. You can have a look at that. For example, it's like Hunch Chunk Sweeper, but whatever. So, you have a transaction. You say that it is coordinated by the cell. Okay. By the cell that owns tablet because it's like 2-phase commit between a secondary cell that owns the tablet and tablet cell. You start a native transaction. After that, you basically add some transaction actions, which are some actions that should be applied on all the participants during this 2-phase commit. And after that, you commit tablet stores update transaction that... That commit this transaction. There should be somewhere, a place where we say that it should be... Like... That participants are public cell and master cell. And I cannot find it. And there also should be a place where we say... I guess that's the definition of the action. That like what we do in prepare and what we do... Yes. But this is actually done by transaction actions. Let me go back. What we're looking for Hunch Chunk Sweeper. So... What is it for? Okay. Whatever. So, basically... I think if we add an action to some cell, it stores our internal is that... Like... This is a participant. I think the list of participants is the list of entities with actions as well as some additional list if you want. Okay. That makes sense. So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically... So, basically, like, there is a TREC update tablet stores transaction action that that touched to this transaction and you may find actually... Bings I think it's like... Yeah. So, basically, it looks like that. So, you can register some kind of a transaction action within your local transaction measure. Basically meaning that if you receive a transaction... With this specific очистка... with this specific transaction action, like what should you do? And because this is a part of a two-phase commit, you have three handlers for every tablet action. Like what do you do during the prepare? What do you do during the commit? And what do you do during the abort? And these are the handlers. So like, for example, like in a classical world, like in prepare, you acquire some logs and throw, if log acquisition failed, and in commit, you perform some stuff, and release the log, and in abort, you just release the log. Okay. Makes sense. Oh, Google. Google. And it only has prepare with some reason. Yes, but it is fine. It's just a little bit of a What is it then? Like commit is no-op? Yes. If something is not present in this list, there's no-op. In some very weird cases, you may also have a handler for serialized. Remember that transaction can be serialized. In case if you want to preserve the commit timestamp order. Okay. What does it mean? So you commit. Yes. And serialize is called once, like we generated a barrier timestamp and decided to serialize the transaction. I'm trying to understand, what does serialize, what does the verb serialize mean? Like we discussed that, like we, like with barrier timestamps, we, I don't know, collect transactions, and then we apply them in some order. Yes. Where in this kind of logic is serialize called? It's when you apply the transaction in order. So basically like if you have serialization enabled, Yes. Isn't it the same as, why is it? No. Commit is a moment when to PC coordinator goes to you and says, okay, now it's committed. Because we commit stuff before we actually commit. Yes. Yes. So basically commit is the transaction supervisor mediated process and after that, your transaction goes into serialization queue and after proper battery timestamp, is generated, your transaction is serialized. And this is like two various handlers for this moment. So basically for writes, the actual data write should happen in serialize. Yes. But it is not a transaction action. All right. In tablets, it's not implemented via transaction action. Okay. Yeah. And it's not part of the 2PC. It's a part of 2PC. I mean... Not everything related to a transaction should be stored inside a transaction actions. Because you have a transaction manager. Like your transaction manager may know a lot of different things about the transaction. Let's actually have a look at tablet transaction. So if you open like tablet node transaction, dot h, this is a tablet transaction in terms of tablet node transaction manager. Like this is how transaction is seen by transaction manager. For transaction supervisor is just something that is committable, prepareable, and abortable. And from a viewpoint of a transaction manager, it's actually pretty complex object. So for example, there are... where it is. Oh, shit, it's not here. Anyway, for example, this, like, you know which tablets are affected by this transaction, okay? And this is not a part of a transaction action. I'm basically trying to understand because we, as we discussed, when you write data to tablets, there is a 2PC component. Yes. And the 2PC component is implemented via transactions, right? No. No. No. Once again. Once again. There is a 2PC. Yeah. Which is mediated by transaction supervisor. Okay. The transaction supervisor is doing kind of simple job. It just goes to the affected cells and calls prepare, commit, and abort in a broker order. Yes. Transaction supervisor doesn't know any semantics of this transaction. Yes. And this is a solely responsibility of a local transaction manager to perform the required actions during prepare, commit, and abort, right? Yes. Also, every transaction may have a number of transaction actions. This is just a generic way to, like, enrich the transaction with something that should be hatched, that should happen. Yes. And this is something transaction supervisor is aware of. Like, it knows that alongside with a transaction, there may be a set of some opaque, unidentifiable, unidentifiable transactions. So, it can become opaque for transaction supervisor. Like, it's set of opaque protobufs that can be supplied, and transaction manager knows what to do with this stuff. Okay? And this is what transaction supervisor does. But the semantics of the transaction is not limited by a list of actions that is supplied with that. Because transaction manager can just remember somewhere in their memory, like, okay, when the transaction with A, D, A, B, C, D is committed, I need to do something. And nothing prevents transaction manager from doing this. My question was about kind of code, because... Yes. So, in terms of code, when you perform a write call in tablet node, we remember in the transaction objects from a viewpoint of a transaction manager that some data needs to be read. Okay? We just remember it in the transaction manager. And simply when 2PC comes and says, okay, we need to commit this transaction, this request is forwarded to the transaction manager, and the transaction manager already knows that commit of this transaction is associated with, like, ingestion of some rows into tablet. My question was kind of... So this means that... For example, for, like, tablet node, right? There is, like, prepare that takes logs. Yes. So this prepare is implemented in transaction manager. Yes. We can maybe look at that. That means we have kind of multiple ways where you can specify the number of actions with prepare committed in board. And you can write... There is a transaction manager. Yes. Basically, where do we register this? This larger prepare for 2PC? So there is a prepared transaction commit, which is called by transaction supervisor in the transaction manager. And basically, itransactionmanager is an interface which is shared between supervisor and transaction manager. And this is like an interface with a simple handlers, like prepare commit at a board some transaction. And prepared transaction commit actually does a lot of different things. So, for example, I don't know, like... Signature is incomplete. And this... So this is basically... The important thing here is that this is generic for the transaction type. So basically, like, since dynamic table transactions are used, like, only for... Like, they're used for writes. Yes. And nothing else. This is, like... What I'm saying is that, like... It's fine. Because right now we are overwriting prepare for, like, tablet node transactions. Yes. So this code doesn't exist on master. There is no way how we will ingest some rows in master. Yes. So this is why we can overwrite the generic kind of prepare for the whole transaction. And transaction actions are called separate. From this prepare. Right? Yes. I think it's some generic mechanics by transaction supervisor or something like that. Okay. How is the order... Like, if the transaction has this and also transaction actions, what happens? I think you should look into code. I believe... Oh, no. Actually... No. Actually, we do it manually. Okay. So, like, we call run prepared transaction actions somewhere inside of our preparation. Okay. And this is, like, something simple. And so we probably have this in... So do we see two... We actually see three transaction managers here. Three? Can we click through those three transaction managers in the search? Yes. So this is, like, master transaction managers. Yes. This is, like, chaos. Oh. Chaos nodes. Chaos nodes and tablet nodes. Okay. Chaos nodes have their own transactions. Yeah. They have their own transaction manager. It's all semantics of, like, 2PC handle. Yes. There's a lot of fun stuff there. But, yeah. Let's not talk about it. I mean, because right... Chaos has some, like, fault-tolerant coordinators. Like, some special... Yeah. That's how... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's how... Let's skip it for now. Okay. Okay. Transaction management is fine. I think that's the most we can get out of this reduction stuff. Okay. Garbage collector is probably easy to find. Very easy to find. Garbage collector.cpp. So you can try to find something. It's relatively short, actually. And just in case you need to do something with a little bit of training, let's see if this is the right way to do it. Yeah. You can do it. Yeah. Yeah. In general, I guess object server is, well, a lot of stuff is there. So, yeah, there is like on sweep, which is called periodically. And like you shrink some hash tables just in order to avoid memory leak. And also you sweep zombies and ephemeral ghosts. We will not talk about ephemeral ghosts, but for zombies, you just like look at the set of zombies. You select a number of zombies such that their like garbage collector weight is at most, doesn't exceed something. Okay. And after that, it's simply like... Commits a mutation, which is called destroy objects that persistently like kills zombies. Because like this is a transient stuff. It just goes inside the periodic executor. You select some zombies to destroy and you commit a mutation that like destroys the zombies. Yes. Object manager is... I actually wonder if there can be an optimization that... Removes some zombies. Removes some zombies immediately in case if they are very small. Yeah. In general, master, we have a lot of managers. I guess they're understandable. Like object manager does a lot of stuff. Yes. And object service does even more stuff. Yes. I actually wanted to talk about the objects. I guess object service code, I kind of will remember. We can maybe... Open object service. So there is this whole... Actually, I wanted maybe... Let's put it this way. So what is the path more or less in code of some, for example, weighty set? Oh, shit. It will be very hard. Like... Something. I can try to do it together with you, but there is no way how I remember that. Okay. So there is like execute call. Yeah. Execute is quite low level, right? Yes. It's basically like everything. Read, write. Yes. And also it may contain a number of sub-requests. So execute is the translation from like set this node to this like specific requests. Yes. Actually. So execute... Is a set of Y-path requests. Yes. So execute contains a set of Y-path requests, which are built by the native client. Yeah. And then we go and execute them. And when we... This file is monstrous. So we create an execute session. All right. So we create an execute session. We call the runner PC, which calls the guard as runner PC. Which does a lot of stuff. So first of all, it schedules back off alarm, like in case if it is stuck in a queue for too long time, we will abort that. It doesn't matter. We parse sub-requests. Which just like... Converts protobuf representation into a long number of various fields for every request and sub-request. After that, I don't know what is that. It's one of the stages where we determine which transactions do we need here. Yes. And we will get them some times later. And then we have the wonderful sync phase one, phase two. Yes. So we perform sync one. Are you fine if I don't go into details what exactly happens during the sync phase one? I think, yeah, we can give a general overview. Like the code is complicated. Yeah. So basically, like you perform some syncs. After that, you go to... So these are syncs like... With various cells and various something. So we have a thing after sync phase one completed. Oh my God. What is that? What? Wait, what? Who is the author? Shakurov. Oh my God. It's a wonderful code of self-reference equals make strong list. Okay. So you... Do some things. You are looking for once again for some transactions that you have to replicate. And after that, you run sync phase two. Which you perform. Yes. After that, on sync phase two completed. You run sync phase three. Yes. And after that, you perform run sync phase three. Sync phase three is typically no op. So this is a common case. Okay. And after that, we are going to on sync phase three completed. And I think there is no sync yet. Yes. Sync phase four is not a thing yet. And after that, we are enqueuing sessions. Because we have already synchronized everything. And we just should enqueue it for execution. So we enqueue the ready session. But... Enqueue... Wait, by the way, like... What if this... What part of this is synced? Like is synchronized? Because we synced something. Yes. And do we need like... It can mean two things. We need to replicate stuff. Yes. Does it also mean that we need to execute these requests right now? No. It doesn't? No. You should do it. It happens often. Okay. So... Sorry. I think I need to pick up some library. You can... Try to talk more and then we'll watch the recording. I think I can wait for you to... Everybody's recording it. Oh. I wanted to join the team of Yandex's new transport. And I saw the developer's presentation. How did you know? I didn't know. I didn't know. I didn't know. Just because of text. We started over here, you know. We were talking to JS. Yeah. So... Yeah. Yeah, you know. We talked about Yandex's new relation with esses. And you, as Hyperion, you know, anyway... Yeah. Yeah. That was phenomenal. Yeah. But I think another one is on the future everyone was thinking. Yeah. OK. At that point... It's just about time. Where do they go? Where? Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. He's dealing with logs and who handles logs and постоянable logs. Let's see. It should be somewhere in a cyber server. Okay, Cypress Manager, yay. There is a way to create a log. I like that. Which one? Alexandra? No, it's Maxim. Years ago. There are a lot of funny comments by Alexandra there, by the way. So Cypress Manager is the... What is the difference between Cypress Manager and Object Manager? Because not all of them are Cypress objects. You can do a way to get a chunk. Ah, okay. Yes. Do you know where? No. From where? I can't... Ah. Okay. You don't. Oh, I don't. Okay. She's a big fan of funny comments in code. If you look in the Hydra documentation, you will find a lot of... What is your favorite comment? It's not for the... I like... I don't... I like all of them except some of the ones we taught last time. Awesome. Okay. So you tell this entire encyclopedia, you might be interested to know a bunch of things. Yes. No. Oh, it's not in the master. Yeah, so that's a little fraction. Yeah, Mark's also has some funny comments here and there in my produced part. Like, there was a lot of pain. Yeah, I think mine are mostly boring. Okay. We're looking. So you're simply saying Cypress Manager has all the stuff related to logs. Right. And that's fine. We can quickly open, let's see, traversal. So the path of, like, a fetch request is a switch. It basically goes to transfer traversal. This is, like, some very weird web search. Yeah. So, like, we can see that we have some kind of a So, like, we can see that we have some kind of a Yes. Heartbeat processing is done in So, there are different kinds of them. For example, data no tracker service or technical tracker service or, you know, you got it? Incremental heartbeat. Yes. And this is where we probably call some, like, we probably call chunk service or something. Like, chunk manager with some sort of. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Sure. Do something with those chunks or here is a new location. We're going from here data no tracker. Like there is a data no tracker service and there is a data no tracker. It also has some logic. And yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, we can see that we have some kind of a web search. Yeah. So, we can see that we have some kind of a web service. And here is a database. So, we can see that we have some kind of a web service. Yeah. It's like, like, mount, sending the hive mount message. Who's the manager of? Okay. Yeah. That would be sure. Yeah. Or service service. It's our service and master service. So, it had, like, mount. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I forgot about that. There is one case of two PC commits within master cells. For some reason, that I don't really remember. I don't know. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The most common way of sending a mount or a dynamic table is a two-phase commit between the native and external cell. And after it is committed, we send a hive message to the public. Okay. I don't remember the exact reason. But there is a tablet manager. Oh, well. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, wow, am I here? Three years ago, very true. Finally, this story is not just educational, but for me it's also like a recap of my 80 years of IT career. So we can do more tablets. This is the Mount Table Tablet. Oh, yes, because you have the Mount Table Tablet. And I believe... Oh, wow, is it a takeover? Yeah, let me pause this message. Okay. And then... And then we also declared some... So this is Dunamount. Okay, Dunamount. It also declares some kind of repair. I mean, I guess it doesn't matter. I think we played it. Why it's so hard. And Tablet stuff goes on here. Probably nothing particularly interesting. Hive? Maybe let's look at just some of the Hive files. You'd probably see... Hive manual CPP is the first one. It's pretty good. It's pretty good. It's pretty good. This is the one that has like the queue, the mailboxes. Yeah, there's also separate mailbox without CPP. Okay. You have this like indices of messages, blah, blah, blah. Like it's not something very interesting. Okay. Dynamics tables, the write path code file we talked about. Well, the write path... It starts in the proxy. In the proxy, I guess it's actually... Write path of what? Dynamics tables. Actually, the most important thing that you're interested in is native transaction.cpp. This one. We're constantly distracted. I can't follow. So this is the class, actually. Wait. Yeah. Yeah. It has everything. Okay. It has everything. So this is the one where we do write stuff. Like insert rows, for example. Yeah. Actually, I'm not sure. No, it just should be here. It's maybe called the other way. Modify row. Yeah, that one. Okay, yeah. Yeah. Like... A lot of things are going on here. Okay. Yeah, there's also the whole proxy part, which is annoying. But, I mean, we'll find dynamic table input. And then before that, I think there is some... The buffering is... I mean, it's understandable. That's fine. Somewhere in the process. Okay. To PC coordination, we kind of talked about. So, we can start with the table snapshot implementation. And table snapshot implementation. So, we can start from simpler one? Yeah. So, what are you interested in? No, I think... I just... By the way, some of those things, I kind of... I know where some of those things are. And we're opening them just for the sake of completeness. Okay. So, we like source and dynamic store. Source and dynamic store, which is kind of big. Okay. So, we're opening them. So, we're opening them just for the sake of completeness. This one is the... This one has the... All this lock-free stuff, right? Yes. All this lock-free stuff. And tablet snap, what's... Tablet snap, what's... No, it sounds like... Yes. Also, in general, tablet... Well, I guess, you know, like there is... There's some different parts of tablet node run time. For example, queries. services, the entry point, the tablet shenanigans, like execution shenanigans. And I guess also this one is the one that implements the dynamic store, or like locate dynamic stores, I think. So here. So here. here. So here. And then, you know, it's master one. Oh, OK. That's something related. Yeah, something. Is it page tablet store? Yes, that's the one that is used. Yes. Get order tablet, save terminal account. That's mine. OK. OK. And then. This. OK, now we have a whole important section. What do you know about scheduler code? Probably not much, but controller agent code, at least. Controller agent code has a lot of crazy stuff. Yes. So maybe we can just talk about the categories of crazy stuff. So for example, there are very many kinds of pools. Yes. There are kind of different controllers. There are interrupts. Yes. Let's start somewhere, maybe. Like how is it like an operation handled on controller agent? First of all, we can start by mentioning the very obvious file operation controller tail. Our favorite file. But it's actually a base class. Yes. It's a base class. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. It's a base class. It's like all the real controllers are derived from that. It's a, I don't know. How long is that now? It was in manager or something? 20K, 12K. 12K lines. OK. Yeah, but this is like a base class for controllers. So we have, for example, an orders controller, that is derived from that, and orchestrates multiple operations and operations. So let's see, the types of controllers. We have an order controller for an order operations map. Yes, order controller for orders operations like order merge or order map. We have a sorted controller for sorted merge and reduce. And we have a sort controller for source and map reduce. Yeah, this is fun. So we have sorted controller for sorted map and sorted reduce, sort controller for the shuffle. Yes, interface partitioning is also there. These, so the controllers are the ones that are responsible for, they cut up the operation into jobs, right? Not really. It's mainly done by champs. Okay, yes. And then what do the controllers do? All the rest of the stuff actually. That's some example. Launching speculative job. All the transactional sheets. Yes. Fetching inputs. Oh, and the suppression. Okay, and then we have... In case of... In case of MapReduce, like all of this complex shuffling logic. Shuffling. Then we have the chunk pools, which are the ones that are dividing data into jobs. Yes. And we have a bunch of those as well. Sorry? We have a bunch of those as well. Yes. Ordered and ordered. It's actually more... Sorted and new sorted. Let me have a look. Some main of them. And they also have some unit tests, I think. Yes. I have a vanilla one. I have a vanilla one that does nothing. I have unorders. I have sorted. Okay. I have shuffle. What is shuffle? Like shuffle for MapReduce. Okay. Orders. New sorted. Multi chunk pool. I don't actually remember what it does. I introduced it, but I don't remember what's in it. Maybe, we do it at some other time, for relatively. Orders. 5 years ago. What the fuck is that? Some chunk pool over multiple chunk pools, and it was needed for... I think for working with various partitions in MapDuty, because previously we had a separate chunk pool for every partition. And now we don't. Actually, the controller agent code, I don't know how to... It is very complicated. And I don't know how to translate that into any... Because, for example, there are... What are they called? There are chunks, but there are also stripes. They are... What are the other terms? Slices. Slices, stripes, chunks, striplists. And it's crazy. It's quite hard to understand what's going on. But I don't know what we can do with this. I don't know. So these controllers... No, actually, this is for controller. And this is where we create multi-tools. Multi-tools. Okay, you're searching. So chunk pools are responsible for dividing data into jobs. There are actually two interfaces there, like chunk pool input and chunk pool output. There are also cookies in this class. Yeah, so... Chunk pool, basically, chunk pool input is the input of a chunk pool where you can put in some data, like some data to process, and chunk pool output is where you grab... Grab the data from... Like the jobs and something. Cookies are... They're actually input cookies and output cookies, and they're basically like descriptors of something. The output cookie is basically a job. And the input cookie is like a piece of data you've added, and you can, for example, say that some cookies are unavailable, like if the data is lost. Yeah. And that part is also... Okay, that's just... After chunk pools, we typically go to, like, there is... Is it job controller or job... There's something with job manager. Job manager. Job manager. And that one is also a conflict. Yeah, well, it's like very tightly connected. Yeah. There's just one job manager, right? No, there is a job manager. Oh, okay. So... I think you're right. Yeah. Yeah, I think you're right. Yeah. I think you're right. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So... Okay. So there is a job manager, and source of job manager, and extra job manager, you know, what is that? Improving job manager, and legacy job manager, and experiment job manager, and competitive job manager, and speculative job manager. What is extra? Oh, I think it's some... Yes, it says Nikita's. Oh, fuck. Why is it called extra? I think we get... Another name, no? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Okay. Maybe they renamed it. They also... You know that they wrote the docs. I think they renamed some stuff when they wrote, like, after they wrote the docs. Yeah, so that is... Yeah, but also, this manager is typically like, kind of, that's like, oh, drop something. And joblet is the precursor to a job. Yeah. And what does it do? Sorry? What is this manager's? Basically? Extra job manager, like, spawns extra jobs. Like, it had a feature, have a feature, that if you want, you can order for every piece of a data length that is going to be processed, you may order a number of jobs. For example, in case if you want to infer some LLM that doesn't fit into a single post, you may ask to create two jobs per each piece of input data. Mm. Like, that's... Yeah. Like, a primary one or a number of secondary ones. And this is also... And it's basically happening with, like, kind of, where the model operation... Yes. Perfect. Yeah. So those job managers, they... These are the ones that schedule the jobs. Okay. Right? But also, it's scheduling the jobs. Well, I mean, it asks... Correct jobs. Yes. Asks someone to schedule the jobs. Yes, yes, yes. And, well, scheduling... Then it goes to the scheduling as well. There is some insect node interaction. Do you know something important in insect nodes? What exactly? Like, there is a lot of stuff... Yeah. There is a lot of stuff there. A lot of stuff Kostya probably knows. I mean, there's this whole runtime part. I think Kostya already knows it better than me. Yes. There is... Because just hair near your role... Yeah. ...during the... Yeah. ...outfall. See you, right? No, no, no. Allocations. Allocations, yeah. Yeah. Allocations are actually... Well, I guess you probably can't tell us much about the allocations. I want to ask... So my code stuff with control agents was always, like, where does the logic of what an environment... What is persistent and what is not persistent live? So in terms of operation snapshots, for example? Almost everything is persistent. And, like, basically, like, where and how do we call, like, who is the... Snapshot builder. Yes. We just periodically... Okay. ...call it and ask to build this... Yeah. Before controller agent. Before controller agent. Before, yeah. Okay. And with... And that's fine, I guess. And then the snapshot contains some stuff we can talk about in actual knowledge. Okay. Of course, then there's the... There are also, like, master integration. That's fine. Like master connector and all of these components. It does a lot of stuff. What... Okay. So I have a list of stuff. There's snapshot control agents. So different types of full snapshotting interruption. Then the next bullet point says oranges. What's that? I don't know. I think maybe that was ranges. No, I don't know. Ranges? Ranges? Ranges? Ranges? I don't know. Okay. What is over... What is over... Interrupts? I guess, I mean, there is... Who handles that kind of stuff? I think we discussed it. Controller agent? Obviously. But there is, like... Isn't there some kind of interruption... Like, someone has a method for interruptions. Like chunk pools? Or jobs? Okay. I mean, it's... It's done from other... Yeah. Okay. I also want to finish up. There are some master... Shenanigans related to data nodes, I guess. And in general data nodes, are... Kind of. Like there is some trick... Data nodes, I think the main thing data nodes, chunk store. Right? I'm really struggling. Probably. But for example, like, I don't know, pending restart and all of that stuff. This is a replicator-related project. OK, you don't know anything. That lives in replicator. Replicator is clear. It lives in chunk replicator. Let's then finally cover some maybe where he lived. Sorry? So some generic stuff in where he lived. Let's try to understand what goes on. Like, what important stuff do we have in where he lived in general? Native client. We have native client. The whole 18. Yeah. I remember I wanted something from where he lived. But I don't really remember. I mean, journal stuff lives there. Yes. A lot of punk-related code lives in those files. But Tablet Cell Write Manager. Yes. We opened that one. That is sweet. There is a Tablet Cell Write Manager and Tablet Write Manager. And Tablet Cell Write Manager actually orchestrates an overall Tablet Write Manager. Yeah. Yeah. This is basically like the 22.4 release why I had to edit it. This is basically why I had to recreate all the Tablet Cells. OK. I think there's probably some important stuff. And where he lived has a lot of weird code in general. But I guess we can read it. There's not much to know. There might be a lot of, like, I don't know. What are, do you know any important parts of where he lived you think that need to be, like, in high, in an index, kind of? Like, there is obviously native client. But I think there's a lot of code. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The client and implementation of all of the native kind of methods. We understand where it does live. I don't know because, like, I don't write code for a lot of time. Yeah. It's like, there's a lot of system code, election manager, I guess. But that's kind of understandable. I don't know. I guess that is probably almost all the complicated things we might need to touch. They're probably even more complicated, like more complex things in master, and more complex things in tablet node. But yes, that's fine. You already told the previous lectures about how master types have like type handler, proxy. Yeah, proxy and type handler. Stuff like that. Initial, there's initializer. And then I guess initial snapshot loading happens in that's like the created automaton, right? And Hydra discovers the latest snapshot. I mean, I'm mainly asking like the code that is actively loading stuff from snapshot is the created automaton parts, right? Yes. And then there's also some validation. There that I remember. I don't know. I think that's what we can gather for now, if you have anything to add. If you think of some things that we imported, things that we will install. I'm not sure, actually. OK. I think we can stop, kind of. Oh, I actually want chunk list balancing, which I guess there is some sort of balance. There is a chunk list balance, or not see it. I think it is. OK. Well, I think we can stop and go and relax. Maybe.
