Starting...
Loaded the model...
 to this home computer. Hi, Grigory. How are you doing today? Good, good. Unfortunately, I also don't have any explicit plan of my talks. Feel free to ask any additional questions as we go. I'll probably forget something or whatever. Okay, basically, I promised today to talk about chunk replicator and chunk list structure. They are two very independent things. So let's start with chunk replicator and after that switch to chunk list. So basically, what chunk replicator is responsible of? Basically, it's responsible for the chunk list structure and the chunk list structure. So it's responsible for keeping chunks replicated. So if we have some chunk, it typically has what is called replication. So it has some replication properties assigned to it. So we may have one chunk which has replication factor equals to three and SSD medium, for example, and we have another. So we have a chunk whose replication is, let's say, our C1222, which is a Razor codec, and the Razor codecs are used instead of replication factors in case if chunk is a Razor codec and it is stored on HDD. We have plenty of such chunks on the clusters and basically chunk replicator is responsible for maintaining them in the desired state. So if some chunk has assigned replication factor and medium to each, it's the responsibility of chunk replicator to ensure that it will have exactly three replicas and they will be located exactly on SSD drives. Because for example, if some data node goes off, the number of replicas goes below three. In this case, we need to replicate more data sets, somewhere, or the medium of a chunk can be changed or some other weird stuff may happen. Also, there is one more functionality of replicator that I will not touch actually a lot today, but chunk replicator is also responsible for initial assigning of replicas, because when you create a new chunk, you should have some seed replicas where it will be stored, like during the chunk write, chunk upload process. And this is also a responsibility of chunk replicator, but it's not very interesting. So we'll probably not talk about it too much today. Okay, so basically in the model of chunk replicator, we have a number of chunks, I already have them here. And also each chunk has another model, which is called the chunk replicator. And we have a number of replicas assigned to it. So basically we know that this chunk is located on node number one and node number two, and actually it's not very correct because we also know about medium. So, put this. So basically we know that this chunk is being stored on node one on SSD, for example, and on node two on HDD. Somehow it happened like that. And from the point of view of chunk replicator, like this chunk is pretty bad. The replication factor is wrong, and the media is also not very correct. And for this chunk, we know that we have node one that has part one, and node two that has part two, and so on. So we have a number of replicas created with each chunk. And ideally we want this set of replicas to be consistent with what is expected from this chunk to be. Let's start with maybe like replicas part. They are stored on master or like sometimes in Sequoia, but likely we won't have it like this. So we have a number of replicas created with each chunk. And we can see that in our clusters for the nearest future. And the set of these replicas is kept consistent using data node hard bits. So basically we have a number of nodes that are reporting hard bits to master. There are two kinds of hard bits, the full hard bit and the incremental hard bit. And the full hard bit is being sent to a node is being registered to the master. And during the full hard bits, the node reports all the chunks it has stored. So while we have full hard bit, it basically says I have chunk A, chunk B, chunk C and chunk D. Actually not only chunks, it's like always not chunks, but replicas. So it's like chunk ID plus medium or plus part index in case of a random chunk, but you got it. Basically, after the return, it's like, oh, I got it. And then after registration, we send a full hard bit that reports the whole list of chunks that are being stored on the data nodes. I think right now it's locations probably. Yes. Now it is being split. And actually instead of one full hard bit, we have a number of full hard bits reporting list of chunks from every location, but it's not actually important. Like say, the final results are the same. And the only reason why it was done is sake of performance. Because if your data node is like HBA node, you have 30 disks, you have a lot of chunks. And this is a very heavy mutation because the full hard bits is a single mutation. And if you register, I would say like 100K replicas, which is not crazy for a large node. If you register 100K replicas during a single mutation, it will just block the automaton thread for some like significant period of time, like 100K replicas. So it's like 100 milliseconds or more, which is not very nice. So it was split into number of smaller hard bits, but it doesn't matter. Sorry, I've heard a lot the word mutation also in the code. Could you please define it shortly? The mutation, like the master is a replicated state machine. So basically it's like a number of replicas and each replica has identical hopefully identical state of some automaton. Yeah. And the mutation is basically a persistent change that modifies this automaton. So when you change the state of a master anyway, like you're creating your table or you remove something or you register a new chunk or you tune some quarters for a user, whatever, all these actions are persistent mutations. And the mutation is persistent. is basically a term from consensus algorithm because these state machines are being replicated using some consensus algorithm which is called draft and we'll probably talk about that in the next parts of our course and basically every persistent modification of the automaton is called a mutation and full-harbit is a mutation as well like you persistently modify the state of the master. It's actually an important point and today we'll deal with many different things. Some of them are persistent and some of them are transient and basically the persistent things are the things that are part of the automaton state and the transient things is something that is being kept in memory of the master server but in case of the master server restart it will be deleted. So when you are talking about like anything on the master it's always important to recognize whether it is persistent or transient and it is like every time you modify any variable in master's code or think about anything you have to keep in mind whether it's persistent or transient and the main difference is that persistent is something that survives restarts. Transient is something that doesn't survive restarts and persistent variables can be modified only using mutations and transient variables can be modified like in any way you want you can just do anything within your process. So yeah it's a good point actually and like all the replicas actually everything we have on this picture now is persistent. So yeah it's a good point actually and like all the replicas actually everything we have on this picture now is persistent. So all the chunks are persistent, the replication information of chunks is persistent and replicas are persistent as well. It's all persistent and so full hardwit is inherently a mutation because it modifies the persistent data structures inside the master it changes the for example list of replicas of chunks. Okay so we have this full hardwit request that sends the whole list of chunks that are being stored on data node from data node to the master during the registration and after that this set of chunks is being changed from time to time because you are keeping writing new chunks to the data nodes and some old data is being removed so all replicas are being removed as well so there is another request actually mutation that is called incremental hardwit and it basically reports a delta between the current list of replicas stored on some data node and the new one. So the incremental hardwit is a request of form okay i have added chunk e and removed chunk b and these requests are much smaller because typically within one query you do not type that much chunks most of your data is cold so most of the chunks live on your data node for a very long time so like they are not being changed from time to time so the incremental hardwits are much much more light rather than full hardwits. And this is basically what keeps the state between master and data nodes eventually consistent. So whenever some change occurs on data node it is being replicated to master but let's see how it works. So if you uploaded some replica of some chunk to data node master will know it so. Now let's discuss actually the chunk replicator because what we discussed before was like chunk subsystem of the master and the chunk replicator is a little bit different creature. So the chunk replicator is basically a multi-factor chunk replicator. So it's basically a single master that is being executed in a process of master server. So like you have your master and we'll talk later whether it's leader or follower it's not trivial question for now let's think that we have a single master. So we have a chunk replicator here which is kind of a reconciler that tries to... like make various actions in order to like enforce the replication strategies of chunks. Basically the chunk replicator consists of three major parts. The first part is called chunk placement. This is a subsystem that helps to allocate replicas for chunks given some constraints. So for example when you upload a new chunk with replication factor free you want to allocate on SSD drive for example you want to find three nodes. So you want to find three nodes. That have spare SSD space and that are located in different racks for the fault tolerance sake. And ideally you also want to balance the storage and the writing loads between various nodes. So chunk placement is a subsystem responsible for that. So it allocates replicas. We have this poor chunk that should have three SSD replicas and actually has one SSD and one HDD replica. And chunk replicator will try to create new SSD replicas and in order to do so it will also ask chunk placement for for the new replicas of this chunk. The second one is Refresh Queue. So it's the chunk object. So you are just saving the Happy memorable code to be finely run in the looks at chunk and checks what is going on. And the third part is job scheduler, which is basically the only way how chunk replicator can enforce something. So it is a mechanics that provides data nodes information about what should they do, like remove some old chunk replica or replicate something from here to there or something else. So this is like a very high, high level explanation of what we have. And now let's go a little bit deeper into each of these three parts, but maybe like just for the sake of like better understanding of what is going on, let me show how all these three entities work together on a simple example. So, so you have like a good, high level understanding of what is going on. So let's look at short story. So what's going on? Oh, true movies. What? Holy. So suppose we have a chunk with three replicas. So a chunk is three replicas. And one of the replicas died. First, let's understand what dies mean. When the data nodes is being registered to the cluster, it is assigned a transaction, which is called prerequisite transaction, which is basically a marker of node lock. And it's a sign of a transaction, which is basically a marker of a node lock. So it's a sign of a transaction, which is basically a marker of a node lock. And it's a sign of a node lock. And it's a sign of a node liveness. So when this transaction is aborted, the node is considered dead, which is logical. Like, or you notice being registered, it's starting pinging its own prerequisite transaction. Oh no, it's not prerequisite transaction, it's list transactions. When nodes are being registered, it starts pinging its own list transaction. And when nodes, when node dies, it stops pinging it. After some time, the transaction will be aborted. And then the master, will understand that the node is dead. So, so suppose one of the nodes dead, their list transaction got aborted. And now master understands that one replica is gone. At this moment, chunk replicator doesn't make any decisions. So the only thing that's important, all the actions are postponed. And this is done for the sake of performance actually. Because when the node dies, like you have 100K replicas per node, you don't want to rescale your 100K replicas to the other nodes . Instead, you just mark this chunk as something that requires attention. And this is basically putting this chunk into a refresh queue. So the only thing that mutation of node disposal makes for the chunk is putting it into refresh queue. Also, as I promised, we will always keep an eye on what is persistent and what is transient. I think you should already understand like whether the node disposal is persistent or not. Of course, it is persistent because it changes the list of replicas stored in master persistence state. However, refresh queue is transient. It is being refilled after each master restart, and we will talk about it later. But you should just keep in mind right now that refresh queue is transient, and this is fine. Like you can modify transient variables from persistent mutations. But you cannot do vice versa. You cannot modify persistent state from transient actions. So we have a persistent mutation of node disposal. It changes the list of replicas of a chunk, and it puts it into a transient refresh queue. It's that simple. After that, after some period of time, chunk replication, which is a periodic activity reconciling the objects inside the refresh queue, will allow you to change the list of replicas. And we will retrieve our chunk from the refresh queue. And after that, there some synchronous processing starts. So basically, chunk replicator looks at desired state and current state and looks at what is wrong. In many cases, it's like, all right, like you have everything fine. But in our case, the chunk replicator recognizes that one replica is missing. So it makes a decision that we need to create the third replica using replication job. And in order to do so, this is actually a tricky question. I constantly forget the direction. Andrei, do you remember if we have by default push or pull replication? We push. I think we push. We push. OK. So what happens? Each data node, in terms of master, has its own queue, which is called replication queue. But again, we won't do it now. If it's not, let's another one. Let's educator loop,oren t point node. The old request sendoeffect is made is getsSol he. And there's structures none what is actually proper 66 certificate if. This is actually like the list of chunks that are stored on these nodes that should be replicated to somewhere else. In our case, our chunk has two replicas. So when chunk Replicator observes there is not enough replicas, if there is not enough replicas, then no replica. So on this, the�just have to do what we do inside the report, but we do also do a real successfullyęiałah. it pushes this chunk into replication queues of both of its replicas. If Andrey was correct, that the push is the default mode. So it pushes this chunk to the replication queues. And that's it. So no other synchronous actions for that. We just remember that we need to tell to node1 that it should replicate this chunk somewhere else. Okay? Andrey, Pasha, is it still fine? Yeah. Cool. So what happens next? All the nodes are periodically making another kind of hard bit, which are called drop hard bits. So the drop hard bit is a... ...hard bit that mediates master jobs. So basically, within this hard bit node says, okay, I have this list of master jobs like replication, removal, seal, whatever, running on me. And master, in response, can tell, okay, you should do this or that. So when, for example, node1 makes a drop hard bit to the master, the master observes that there is a chunk in node1 replication queue. So it has to schedule a replication job that will tell node1 to replicate its chunk from itself to some other node. Okay. And at this moment, during the hard bit processing, the master has to decide where do we replicate this chunk. So we need to find a new hole for the third replica. And as you should understand, the subsystem responsible for that is chunk placement. So during this process, chunk replicator uses chunk placement to select a new destination for the third replica of the chunk. And it basically... It basically replies to node with a request to start a replication job of some chunk, let's call it ABCD, to some node, node3. And after that, node1 actually starts replicating its own chunk to node3. And what happens next? After that, after the replication is complete, node3 now has our chunk. So during the incremental hard bit, the node3 will report to the master that it has a new replica of ABCD. Master will register it. And again, when anything changes about the chunk, it is being put into the refresh queue. Now we have the third persistent replica, node3. And we started refreshing our chunk. And after refresh, chunk replicator basically observes it. Okay, it's now everything fine with chunk. So no other actions are needed. It is being removed from all replication queues. But actually, I think it is being removed actually during the moment of the... drop scaling. And that's it. So this is what happens, for example, when you have one of your replicas lost. What are the important nodes here? First of all, jobs are transient. Replication queues are transient. That's nice to remember. Like all these jobs mechanics is transient. The second thing. When master offloads something to data nodes, it should be extremely careful with what happens in case if this job fails. Like you have this replication job running, but for example, it may become aborted. For example, node1 was unable to write the replica to node3, because, I don't know, node3 dead or something else happened. Or this job got a timeout. We were writing, but too slowly or anything else. And at the moment when master offloads the fate of our chunk to the replication job, it starts tracking this replication job closely. And every status change of this job will also cause our chunk to fail. And every status change of this job will also cause our chunk to fail. And every status change of this job will also cause our chunk to fail. And it means that without any external intervention, we will not get the third replica done. So it means that we have to reschedule this job. And in order to reschedule this job, we need to populate replication queue. And in order to populate replication queue, the chunk again. So when this job fails or gets aborted, we put chunk back to the refresh key. Okay? Yeah. Let me see. We cannot, like, how do we make sure we always put it back? I mean, so there are node job heartbeats. Yes. Which will tell you if the job, like, failed. Yes. If the node is just unreachable, I guess it'll eventually just... It disposes. In case of node is disposed, all the jobs assigned to this node are automatically aborted. So if we deregister node one, this job will become automatically aborted, and it will also cause our chunk to refresh again. And jobs? Are jobs persistent? No. It's all transient. Replication queues are transient as well. Uh-huh. Yeah. And so here it's the same guarantee. Like, if job queues are... Like, if we... If we lose information about jobs in any of these situations, we refresh everything, so it's going to be fine. Okay. Yes. So basically, like, we will discuss in details what happens during master restart. Like, why having everything transient is fine. But let's now focus on the scenario where master is alive, but nodes are probably not. So until master is alive, there is no difference between persistence and transient. Everything is safe. Okay. So unless your, like, list of your jobs is removed, you have some state machine of your jobs. Like, they can get aborted, the node can get disposed, they can get completed, a new replica may... Oh, yeah. Actually, there is, like, another funny case. Some spurious node 4 woke up with a replica of our chunk, and it reports to master that it has the same code. So, it's very, very easy to get rid of it. And chunk replicator sees that we already have three replicas. We don't need the fourth, so it can abort the job in this case. Okay? Does it, actually? I think so. I'm not sure, but this... I remember something like that. Yeah. I guess I haven't stumbled upon that part. Okay. Okay. Okie dokie. So, this is basically how replication works in general. There's also a very similar process, which is called repair, which is not replicating chunk, but repairing one of the ratio replicas. It is, like, pretty much the same. Also, there is a pull replication. Like, this was push replication. And then, there's a pull replication. And then, there's a pull replication. For the sake of completeness, let's mention that there is also a pull replication, which, as I remember, is only for hunk chunks. It is also pretty similar, but the only difference is that we assign a job to the destination node, not the source node. So, we have, like, pull replication queue of node 3, and when we decide to replicate hunk chunk from n1 to n3, we will put this chunk into n3 pull replication queue. And then, we will assign a job to the destination node, not the source node. And then, we will assign a job to the destination node, not the source node. And then, we will assign a job to the destination node, not the source node. So, that says that the destination node is pull replication H hhrb it to the master. And when the DOOL requires to get that job from the N1 to the Strc. So... incluin, and do not experiment, the pull replication goes to the master. That, as far... I haven't read the Frechmost code with pull replication which a carefully constructed one. The way I interpreted the code is that you got pull replication queues... Yes. And they have to do with pulling the replicas. Do they, like, really need to be pulled replication queues and be pulled? Yes, actually. Yeah. Oh, okay. So, not only plus, but also in different ways. Spam. are handled at some point. And for each of these jobs, on the master side, you pick the source of the pull replication, so where you're pulling from. And then you put, basically, you reverse it. And then you put this. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, that's right. Yes, you are correct. Yes, yes, yes. It works like that. OK, yes, it is true. So it's basically a pull replication job. Yes. With a destination that is differently sourced than just randomly picked. I don't actually remember the motivation behind this change at all. But we probably won't use hand chunks right now. So I also think that's not very important. But let's just highlight that it exists. Also, in terms of In terms of hand chunks, one should remember that we have CRP, which is a consistent replica placement. But I also won't go into much details for that. Basically, the idea is that you have a lot of hand chunks. And ideally, you want hand chunks of a single tablet to be located. OK. So you want to have the hand chunks of a single tablet to be located at the same node in order to reduce the number of RPC calls and things like that. Maybe let's introduce the hand chunks in 30 seconds. I don't really want to do so. It's optimization in the dynamic tables. We'll probably talk about this a bit later. But these are just some chunks that appear in dynamic tables. And we want all the hand chunks of a single tablet to be located. And in order to do so, we assign each tablet some key. You generate n hash functions from this key that give you some location on this ring. And it provides you a set of replicas. So for a set of replicas, you can have a set of replicas. But for two chunks with the same CRP key, you will get the same set of replicas. And the idea is that when one of these nodes dies, you will replicate them together to the next one or something. Mm-hmm. OK. Yeah. But also, it's not very important. For now, just remember that it exists. OK. The next topic, maybe a little bit more tricky, but not much more, removal. So there are two main pitfalls with removal. The first one. The second one is that, as the Russian proverb says, ,, which means that, unlike replication, you should be really careful when scheduling removal jobs. Because unlike replication jobs, this change is irreversible. And in case if you remove too much, you are cooked. There are many small tricks in the code. So it's not always easy. So there are many, many more tricks that you can use. But there are also some tricks that you can use in the code that tries to reduce the chance of situation where you remove too much. For example, you'll never schedule a removal job if there is at least one job running for this kind of chunk. Or if it is in the crash queue. Or like, you should be very careful with that. And also, we never remove if at least one replication condition is not satisfied. So if you want for your chunk to have three HDD replicas and two SSD replicas, we will remove anything only if we have at least three HDD and at least two SSD. If at least something is missing, we also do not remove. OK? But essentially, this is the same. Like, each node has its own removal queue. And basically, when node goes to the master with job hard, it will try to drain this removal queue and receive some requests for removal. And after the replica gets removed, we report incremental heartbeat with information that this replica no more exists. Also, there is something that I don't remember right now. The specific reason, but it was important, is that there was something called job heartbeat barrier on a data node. And we have to wait before we start actually removing anything. I don't remember the specific motivation behind that. But it is also like for some kind of scenarios in order to not remove something that we don't need to remove. OK? I mean, I guess that's fine. That's fine. It's interesting to find out what exact scenario. Yeah, you can consider this as an exercise for you in order to explore code more. I will tell it like that. But there is also one corner case in the world of removal, which is basically like. OK. Pretty important. We just call it destroyed replicas. Because all the mechanics I described before relies on the fact that we have a chunk object. So we have a chunk object that is being refreshed and something happens with that. But what if you remove the chunk? In case if you remove the chunk, you still have to remove all its replicas. But when the chunk is removed, it does not exist anymore. Like you cannot put chunk into refresh queue from chunk removal mutation. Because at moment of actual chunk refresh, it won't exist anymore. So we also have at each node, which is called destroyed replica queue. And this is the only of these queues which is persistent. So for each node, we have destroyed replica queue, which is not a queue of chunks. It's a queue of chunk IDs. It's basically like the cemetery of tombstones. Like it's a list of chunks that do not exist anymore that we have to remove from this node. So this queue leaves like a little bit separately from all the other chunk replicator mechanics. And it's also persistent. And that's why we have destroyed replica count alert actually. Because it's the only one queue that will not drain after restarting everything. OK? So also when node comes with a job, Harbit will look at it. Destroyed. Destroyed replica queue. We pick some prefix of this queue, and we say no to remove. That's it. Yep. I mean, it is part of replicator as well. Sorry? I think handling of destroyed queue replica queues is also part of schedule removal jobs. Basically, when you schedule jobs, you try to schedule many kinds of jobs from various sources. OK. There are three more kinds of jobs that we didn't cover yet. Still, merge, autotome. Yeah. Also, revive. Sorry? Revive. Also, what are they called, the other ones? Revive is the new one. Revive. Or what? What's the one that is reincarnate? I'm not aware of that. What is that? It's a new one. I think it's like rewrite. Like read a chunk and write it back again. So it was the job intended for, I don't know, like getting rid of legacy things. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. I remember that. Yeah. How is it called? I don't remember. Reincarnate. Reincarnator. Reincarnator, yeah. So I also have revive. I won't get much into details of these jobs because they are not part of Replicator actually. Just jobs that are being scheduled using JobScheduler. But like chunk Replicator is not aware of that. I think the closest one is seal because after we seal journal chunk and what it means, we will also talk later. Like when discussing dynamic table journals. So basically when we seal a chunk on master, we have to also seal it on data nodes. And sealing them on data nodes also a kind of jobs that like replicates, potentially a tail of a journal and marks the chunk file as sealed. And this is also just some process on data nodes. And the only thing you need to know about that in context of this lecture is that every node has also sealed queue, which is apparently also transient. Nothing interesting. For these guys, there are also some kinds of queues, but they are not part of chunk Replicator. So I will just show that now. All right. So this was scheduling. Now let's talk a little bit more about refresh. And probably since like I already covered the best case for refresh is just a queue. You put chunks, you read chunks. So let's talk about the best case for refresh. So I already covered the best case for refresh. It's just a queue. You put chunks, you read chunks. So let's talk about the best case for refresh. There are two scenarios in which refresh gets a little bit tricky. And let's cover them all together because it's all tightly connected with each other. The first case is master restart because when you restart everything, your refresh queue drops and you need to do something. And the second thing is a sharded Replicator. When everything is done. So the first thing I described before happens not on a single peer, but on multiple peers. So let me start explaining the sharded Replicator. And when we will talk about fault tolerance of all of this, we'll also cover full refresh scenario of refresh queue. So let's talk about sharded Replicator. First, you need to provide a stepping-point for you to monitor yourself. But make a signpsonstion, which will give you a DSC message and a script to protect you because the end of the process, you will lose. So you still don't know the solution, but you did not know the solution. So you just decide whether to follow the beginning or end of the process. And your input is thirty-five. Or if you have 10,000 hours of workflow travel time, 20 days. It's really a maximum. That means you're offloaded to 80 all your connections. So you need to check if you have a password in your comments. If it's not, then you need to return it. And each activity of such kind is described by a pair, which is name and shard count. The name is the name of this activity. It can basically be, for example, chunk replicator. Or one other example we used was tablet cell janitor that removes old changelogs of tablet cells. And the shard count is basically the capacity of this activity to be split into a number of shards. So, for example, for chunk replicator, the number of shards equals 60. Can you guess why? No, I've seen the number. I'm very proud of this decision. It's basically least common multiply of 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. So, with any number of followers up to 6, you can distribute your workload evenly. Is it smart? I mean, it's pretty funny. Yeah, I also like it. Yeah, but basically it means that the chunk replicator activity can be divided into 60 parts. And each part can be processed independently. In case of tablet cell janitor, it's pretty the same. You can divide all your tablet cells by some hash into a number of buckets and process each bucket independently. By the way, this is increasable, right? It's rain promotion, but it is... I think so. I don't remember the exact process, but I remember that I wrote... I don't remember the exact process, but I remember that I wrote... I don't remember the exact process, but I remember that I wrote... a long comment about that. I think it's rain promotion, but it's doable. You don't want to roll this because in this case, you may find two replicators responsible for the same... for the same chunk, and you don't want that. Also, you don't want none of peers to be responsible for some chunk. But all right. So, basically, what incumbency manager is... is doing is distributing these shards across the peers. So, every peer knows its set of shards for every activity. For example, in case of an unsharded chunk replicator, the leader knows that it's responsible for replicator with shard 0, 1, 2, etc., 59. In case if a replicator offloading to followers is enabled, each follower will receive a number of incumbencies, meaning that it is now responsible for the corresponding shard of chunks. Okay? Does the leader participate? No, I assume, right? It is participating as a scheduler, but in case if you offload, like, your... if you offload chunk replicator, like, the leader itself will not assign to itself any incumbencies regarding chunk replication. Okay? So, this algorithm is dynamic. Like, you will receive some incumbencies, you will lose some incumbencies. And, for example, like, if some follower dies, its incumbencies are being distributed among other followers. Basically, it's implemented in a relatively straightforward way. So, in chunk replicator, most of the entities, including, as far as I remember... Not sure. Including, probably... chunk refresh queue as well. They are, like, you simply have, like, a number of these entities within a chunk replicator class. So, you have a number of chunk replicators on every peer, and they are basically get, like, enabled or disabled according to incumbency manager. Okay? Yeah. And, let's actually... Let's actually... It's simpler than I thought. Okay. Now, let's talk about full refresh. So... There is... If we're still talking about... So, removal queues... Yes. ...are not shard... Like, they're not sharded. Removal queues are sharded. Destroyed replica queues are not sharded. are not sharded. Yeah, I meant, yeah, destroyed replica queues are not sharded. Oh, that should maybe sharded. I don't remember, actually. They can be sharded, because sharding is done by chunk ID. In theory, you can shard it. Yeah. But yeah, I think code evolved there. It was somewhat improved over time. But the general approach is that for destroyed replicas, each replicator only looks at chunks corresponding to its shard, and it just skips the ones that are not relevant. Maybe. I see, like, I implemented many tricks. So when I was sharding it, like, for some data structures, I sharded it into 60 buckets. For others, I kept a single one, but it was just changing the code so it skips the relevant things. Yeah. I don't remember the exact fate of destination replica queue, destroyed replica queue. But overall, it's also, like, we have destroyed replica queues. And then we schedule a removal job. The chunk gets removed. And we, this is reported via? Incremental. Incremental heartbeat. Yes. Yes. And then we remove it from the term. Yes, because both incremental heartbeat and destroyed replica queue are persistent. So once you report that you removed the destroyed replica, you can update it synchronously inside the mutation, and it's fine. Yeah. And also, it is, I mean, removal is the potent, like, we can fail, I guess, after. Remove, actually removing the file, but before, like, reporting. And then we'll just try again. That's fine. Yeah, it's like, all the removal jobs, like, they are successful in case a file doesn't exist. So if you receive a removal job for a non-existing chunk, you just reply with OK, and that's it. Yeah. This means that basically, a sharding can just, in any case, it's fine. Yeah. Yeah. So anyway, you look at the chunks that you want. Yeah. And then that's fine. OK. Yeah. All right. Now let's move to full refresh. So it's actually pretty simple. So the idea is that sometimes, like, you lose your transient state or it becomes inconsistent. It happens, for example, when the incumbency change. Like, you get assigned an incumbency, and you didn't think about it before. So you have the whole core restarted, or something else happened. And you understand that your data is inconsistent. So in this case, you are doing a very simple thing. You drop all the transient structures. You clear your refresh queue. You clear your replication queues. You clear everything. And once you cleared it, you now, you know, you can do it. You can do it. You can do it. You can do it. But you don't know the state of any of your chunks. Like, all your invariants are lost. So you have to refresh all the chunks. And, like, one possible way to do so is just to put all the chunks into refresh queue. But this is slow as fuck, because you may have, like 100 million chunks per cell, and you don't want to do synchronously after your quorum restarted. So there is a smart invention, which is called global refresh iterators, which is very simple. You have a number of chunks. This is all the chunks on your cell. And they are somehow joined into a linked list. Once a new chunk is created, it is being appended to the end of this linked list. And once some chunks gets removed, it is simply extracted from the linked list, as you should know how to do it if you pass an AA interview. So. You have this linked list of all chunks inside the cell. And global refresh is another state of refresh queue. So basically, there are two states of refresh queue. They're explicit when you have just a queue object of all chunks you want to see. Or global refresh iterator, meaning that we are passing through all the chunks, trying to refresh them. And now we are processing this one. And now we are processing this one. So you just keep refreshing chunks and advancing your iterator as you go. OK? Mhm. Mhm. And by the way, by refreshing, you mean you, I mean, it doesn't really matter where that thing effectively, you put it in the queue and then you take it out. No, you don't put it into queue. Oh, you call refresh like that. There is a periodic. There is a process which is called refresh. It is being executed every some number of milliseconds. Yeah. Every time this process is being executed, it looks at the state of refresh queue and either retrieves some number of chunks from explicit refresh queue and refresh them, or advances iterator into some number of positions and refresh what it observes. And refresh what it observes. And the refreshing of a single chunk is a like fixed procedure that does not depend on the way how it was extracted. It's basically procedures that looks at chunk replicas and the desired state and finds out what needs to be modified. OK? Yes. How do we finish global refresh? Well, as you know, we have like a very simple way to do it. We have a very simple way to do it. As you know, after the last element of the list, new element comes by. So once the iterator goes into new, we start using actually explicit refresh queue. And so let's see. Is it possible, like, if we are in global refresh and a new chunk is created? Yes. It is being put at the end of the refresh queue so you observe it. So at the end of the list? Yes. So basically, there is a chance, like, if you are, I don't know, adding. I guess there is a chance for global refresh, like, never finishing if you keep adding chunks so fast. Well, you have to do it so fast. But in this case, probably yes. Mm-hmm. But in practice. But you'll quickly run out of memory. OK. Now, you can quickly create and remove them, but whatever. There is also a question that I don't remember the answer to. What happens if global refresh iterator already passed by some chunk and something happens with it? Like, will it be pushed into explicit receive, or into explicit refresh queue and wait for, like, global refresh to finish? Yeah, wait for global refresh to finish, or will it be again attached to the end of the refresh queue? I don't remember. OK. You can check. Yeah. Maybe we'll look at local. I believe that. Maybe we'll look at refresh queue first. Yeah. OK, I believe that may go with this talk is to introduce the important concepts, but not, like, go into much, much details. It's fine. Let me think what I could forget. Oh, yeah, actually, like, the important thing is chunk placement. We didn't talk about that. So we also have chunk placement, which is responsible for. Oh, my god. Just a second. Let me think. OK. So chunk placement. So this is basically a set of data structures that are responsible for, like, assigning a new replica for the chunk. I'm not sure if there is something very smart there. I don't know. I'm not sure. OK. OK. Let me think. Let me think. OK. OK. OK. OK. OK. OK. Let me think. Let me think. Let me think. Let me think. Let me think. Let me think. There are some heuristics that tries to balance the nodes. So you try to, like, not to start a lot of write sessions at the same nodes, or they're being ordered by the number of active write sessions somehow. And you also try not to balance the storage in some way. And also, when you are picking replicas, like, you skip the nodes that are in the same failure domain as you in case the conditions are violated. So I think, yeah. Do you remember if we, like, do we try to distribute evenly across? I guess maybe that's easier checked in code. But I remember that the- We can actually look at the code. OK. Let's look at the code together. Like, app. I guess we can do it. Oh. Let's try to remember what's going on here. OK. So you had the loadFactor. And then you have the loadSession. And then you have the loadFactor. Yeah. So you might have to do the same thing again. I think it's only balances by number of write sessions. Or maybe not. Let's see. Node to loadFactor to loadFactor to nodeMap. My god. One. One. And then you have the loadSession. And then you have the loadSession. And there's some weird code there. SIAMAK ROSHANIWICZ- Multi-map of DAO. Yeah, there are some load factors that I don't remember how they are computed. But they are stored order according to that. And you can see that maps. And there are so many different things, but they are not really important. Check remote target. Find consistent placement. My target is not that. You take this and . It's cool. SIAMAK ROSHANIWICZ- I mean, the method is. Get right targets. Yeah, so there is this collector. Yeah, so there is this class, the target collector, that is basically traverses through the nodes and tries to pick the good ones. So there is this check node method that's like. SIAMAK ROSHANIWICZ- Yeah. But what I kind of meant is that as far as I remember, we don't actually try to distribute chunks. Like our main rule is a place, like, is load, plus satisfying the conditions. But basically, I think it's what we discussed with erasure that if we have seven racks. And we. We. We. We. We. I don't know, the different conditions to max erasure replicas per rack equal to 3 and the erasure chunk with, I don't know, six parts. This doesn't mean that it will place one part on each rack. Like the replicator does not distribute parts of erasure chunks evenly, for example, across racks. That it just satisfies the condition. Yeah, I think so. Which is, I mean, a sad thing. It's sad. Like, I implemented logic for data centers that it may automatically calculate max replicas per data center, depending on whether some data center is on or off. So you get as equal packing as possible every time. But for racks, it's not implemented. As far as I remember, it actually is present in our list of C++ projects, I guess. Mm-hmm. Yes. OK. So we have this hierarchy. We have node, host, rack, DC, which is, like, on our class, the nodes and hosts are the same. The abstraction of the host was needed only for splitting nodes, so you can store tablet node chunks at the same physical host as tablet node is running on. Also, we have racks. Also, we have data centers. And that's it. So I think we can, like, give just a few hints about how to think about all of this. So first of all, the current code for all of these subsystems is relatively good in terms of safety. OK. So basically, there are quite a lot of things that we can do. So I think we can give just a few hints about how to think about all of this. So basically, there are quite a lot of things that we can do. So I think we can give just a few hints about how to think about all of this. So I think we can give just a few hints about how to think about all of this. So basically, there are quite a lot of things, checks in various parts of the code. So likely, if you don't do some very strange things, you will not lose the data due to replicator activities. So it is, like, quite unlikely that just by triggering some medium change or replicator factor change, you will lose the data. It's done in a pretty good way. So it's done in a pretty good way. The second thing that chunk replicator is not very good in terms of... And actually, that's one of the ways to actually lose the data. It is not always good in terms of liveness. So, like, it can get stuck in some cases. But it can... Like, if your replicator gets stuck, it can end up with losing data just because your nodes are getting broken and you do not schedule some replication activities. So that's why we, like... That's why we monitor various things, like destroyed replica content, and in an ideal case, the refractive size should also be tracked, and sizes of all the queues I told about today should also be tracked. And that's why we're looking at, like, how do you call it? Like, old missing part chunks or something like that. So, like, there are many things to retract in order just to check that this process has some liveness. And in case it is not alive, it's a good way to investigate what is going on because you may be losing data. And also in case if your replicator is stuck, like, for example, if your refresh queue for some reason is not processed, in this case, you may even not know that the data is lost because in order for chunk to appear in the list of lost vital chunks or whatever, it should be refreshed. So if you don't refresh chunks, you don't know what is going on. So you should... think about that. Also, the chunk replicator is not the best in terms of interpretability because if something doesn't work, it's sometimes very hard to understand why. Like, if, for example, you cannot allocate replica and you receive that, like, you try to allocate nine replicas for a ratio chunk, but you found only seven. It would be pretty hard to understand why. You may have some nodes that are full. You can violate rack awareness. You may have not enough racks. You can... You can not have enough nodes with some kind of medium or allocations disabled. Like, there are many reasons. And the replicator is not very interpretable. So... So... One of the things, like, if you want a big, ambitious task for someone, one of the things I was thinking many times about is, like, introducing some verbose mode. For example, when chunk replicator starts to log everything about a specific chunk. Like, you have some under-replicated chunks that doesn't go away for some reason, and you want to trace what is going on. And in this case, like, you can't have some map in dynamic config, for example, where you put a list of chunks to track, and for these chunks, you get, like, I don't know... Chunk replica placement being verbose, refresh mechanics being verbose, job scaler being verbose, and all of this and all of that. So there are no reasons not to do it. Just no one did. Yeah. So, what else? Sometimes, like, restart helps. So in case if you got everything stuck, sometimes restarting everything helps because you'll go through the process of full refresh. So, like, it may be fine. Obvious fact, but still, like, spikes of destroyed replica queue is also sometimes fine. For example, if someone removes a large table, you'll just get a spike, but you'll see that it's resolving and this is fine. Yeah. Another thing is that there are many actually useful attributes on chunk objects that may help to really what is going on, reveal what is going on. Like, first of all, as you already know, stored replicas, last seen replicas, the list of the current chunk replicas, and the list of replicas that we recently seen. So, for example, if you have lost vital chunk, you can look at last seen replicas and see where it was stored before it got lost. Another very useful attribute is replication status, which computes the status of replication status. So, it's basically a kind of replication ignoring a refresh queue. So, it basically performs refresh for you and returns the result. It won't help you to refresh the chunk manually, but you can see what chunk replicator thinks about the current state of the chunk. So, whether it is under-replicated or lost or lost vital or something. Yeah. I think that's, like, worth talking. So, there are a lot of terms, around this code. Mainly there is replication and there is requisition. And they contain kind of different things. They contain pretty similar things, honestly. Like one is a set of another. So let me see. Yeah. So but it's also actually not important. And they're also rarely like they're rarely inherited and computed like Sorry? I mean, the way they are computed, I think, is quite convoluted. Yes. So we have a chunk replication is a per-medium property and I think... No. Oh my god. I wasn't prepared for this question, honestly. Oh, yeah. I think I remember that. Yeah. Okay. So, chunk replication is basically like in simple terms a map from medium to replication factor. So you ordered this chunk to be present twice on HDD and three times on SSD. You will have two records in your requisition. The chunk replication... It was replication. Yes. And requisition is pretty the same but annotated by accounts. So, for example, account A ordered two replicas of HDD and account B, like by sharing this chunk between tables. And account B orders three replicas of HDD and account C orders one replica of SSD. So this will be requisition and the replication will be simply HDD free and SSD one. Okay? Uh-huh. That's it. I got it. Oh, no, have to pay you back the change. See, the final test starts soon. Okay, friends, if you should be Game and labor, then almost tank the program or, or you cannot write it. And I know so many updates on this product will come up very soon. it's requisition and it basically starts from a chunk and goes up into parents, I think, traversing this somehow, and it recomputes requisition and replication and commits mutations that changes it. So something like that, but this is also like pretty stable. I saw it broken maybe once. But it's important to remember that, yes, in case if you observe something strange with accounting. What else? I think, yeah, a lot of this is induced by all of the S3 stuff. Like it's still very confused. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's very confusing that like erasure, for example, the property of erasure chunks have an application factor of one and is, I don't know how to say this, that basically like if you create and like if you create a table and then you change, you change the number of times, you change the number of times, you change the number of times, you change the number of times, you change the number of times, the table itself will have a replication factor of three. Like the replication factor of the table does not change. But, and then it gets complicated because I think for the chunks, both replication and requisition are like overridden to have, like to consider erasure. But, yeah, it's... Yeah, there are some funny things. Also, there is an effect of vitalness that chunks with... is replication factor 1 are automatically getting non-vital. Yes. I guess it's fine. There is some sort of like... And all of the stuff with requisitions is just... There are a bunch of optimizations there. It's like there is some sort of requisition registry and the code is just quite convoluted. Like we update it sometimes. We retrieve stuff from this requisition registry. Is this all... Do you remember? Like is this all perf related or what kind of... There are a lot of knobs here, to be honest. But like these are all the things I don't remember immediately by my own and probably you should not as well. Okay. I didn't even read most of this code, to be honest, I think. So I think it's more important to understand the high-level concepts of which subsystems may get broken and how and... Okay. Okay. Yes. Okay. I think it's mostly it with replication. Maybe we'll discuss something during the next session, in case I remember that. In general, I think this is it. Okay. Let's now talk a little bit about chunk list and chunk trees. It's, I would say, like not so hard thing. There are many tricks, but you don't need to remember that. So let's just start with revising something. Okay. So chunks are not stored, like, in a particular way. They're not stored in a plain list. They're arranged into some structures. And the high-level abstraction for the structure is called chunk tree. So basically everything is arranged into a tree. And each element of this chunk tree is either a chunk or chunk list or do you remember what else can we have? We have chunk views. Yes. And chunk views. I think that's it. Yeah. So basically chunk lists are internal nodes of the chunk tree. And chunk list can have some chunks attached or another chunk list attached. So let's start with maybe the most trivial case of static tables. We don't have any chunk views. We don't have any real tablet structure. So we just have chunk lists as internal nodes and chunks as leave nodes. So, yeah, it looks like that. So one of the questions that is important. No. Is why they are not arranged into plain structure. And one of the main reasons is the efficient traversal of a chunk tree. So basically, like, we have a chunk tree traversal that goes through the chunks in order to... Fetch what is needed to read in order to, like, read some read range or a number of read range. And this read range is maybe in, like, pretty weird forms. They can have boundaries of keys or row indices or tablet indices. And the ends can be included. This is maybe still the paperback structure of Chancellor might've been, you know, one of the ones that had scratching spots. So. Okay. That might be like a really fancy simplifying operation that we found 곰 but, you know, is there anything new that can have some or at least something new built in to? Like, if it's actually in a link structure? And it is doing it by traversing the tree and throwing away the branches that are completely outside of the read ranges that we request. Actually, so what kind of, in algorithmic terms, this tree is organized how for us to allow to efficiently skip stuff? You mean how do we keep it balanced? I mean, what are the first, like, besides what are the properties? Is it like a binary, like, is it a binary tree based on? It's not binary. It's like pretty balanced with the factor. I don't remember. I think something over 20 or 30. But there is an entity which is called chunk tree balancer, which does what you expect it to do. Like, typically, after you write new chunks, they're being attached to the root, I think. And it may require a balancing called stuff. It's similar to skip go tree. But it's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. Like, it's some way, it's similar to skip go tree, which is basically like some kind of lazy bottom-up rebalancing. Yeah, but overall, like, this, for example, for sorted tables, there is the order of chunks through the tree. The DFS traversal order will, like, output the chunks in order they are sorted in the table. So both from sorted and unsorted. So and then I assume we have, as far as I remember, we have, like, statistics slash aggregation for chunk lists. So for, like, chunk list nodes, we know the, like, left and right, the kind of boundary keys of the first and last chunk. And we can use that. And we can use that to skip, for example, a whole sub tree. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Makes sense. Yeah. It's been balanced by chunk tree balancer. Also, there are multiple, which is called chunk, they're actually chunk list kind. And let me double check, but I think it's chunk list kind. Or chunk list type. Awesome. No. How is it called? Chunk list. Chunk list kind. How is the second counterpart called? Yes. Here. What? Just a second. Chunk list content type. So you have chunk list type and chunk list content type. Nice. So chunk list, we can start with chunk list content type, because it's simpler. Like, before my weird changes, each, it is called chunk owner, which is either table, file, or journal. Had exactly one root, which was, like, the main root of its chunk tree. After my weird changes, I'm going to change it to, like, chunk list type. And I'm going to change it to, like, chunk list content type. And I'm going to change it to, like, chunk list content type. And I'm going to change it to, like, chunk list content type. And I'm going to change it to, like, chunk list content type. And now the chunk list is from chunk list. And for static chunk lists, it's very simple. Like, it's just a regular tree, as we discussed before. But for journals and dynamic tables, it's a little bit trickier. For example, for ordered dynamic tables, you have a chunk list which is called ordered dynamic. Double check. Just a second. Okay, it's called ordered dynamic root, and it's the root of the ordered dynamic table. It has a number of children which are called ordered dynamic tablet. And as you might understand, they correspond for a single tablet, of the ordered dynamic table. And as you can understand, the number, like, it is one-to-one matching. Like, the tablet number K of ordered dynamic table is a child number K of ordered dynamic root. Okay? So basically, when you, for example, recharge the ordered dynamic table and add more tablets, you just add more children to ordered dynamic root. And ordered dynamic tablet is a plain list of chunks. You cannot have any hierarchy below. It's just a plain list. And as I remember, for some purpose of Vanya Smirnov, the statistics of this involve Fenwick trees, but I don't remember this stuff. Also, we have, like, sorted dynamic root, which is very simple. And it's very similar in terms that we have, like, a number of children. It just sorts a dynamic tablet, and it also has a list of chunks. The only difference that ordered dynamic tablet is a Q-like structure. Like, you can add to the end and remove from the front. And sorted dynamic tablet is, like, a random access structure because during the compactions, you can... like, change sets of chunks in an arbitrary way. Yes. Also, there is a weird creature, which is called sorted dynamic subtablet. It is something that was done for bulk insert. And this is one more level of hierarchy when you have the sorted dynamic subtablet chunk list with the chunks you have attached there via bulk insert. And in the future, after some compactions, et cetera, et cetera, they're getting back there. And then just... Chunk lists will be removed. How do dynamic table, I guess, or types map to... For example, like, in sorted dynamic tables, there are, like, partitions, I think. And then there is, like, Eden. Is it just... It's just not represented in a chunk list structure as far as I know. Yeah. So you just have a set of chunks assigned to a table, tablet, and that's it. So this is mostly done, like, to simplify many things at once, obviously. First of all, because when you're performing chunk tree traversal and you have tablet index selected, you can easily, like... Go. Go to the specific tablets. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Basically, traversal, like, for these... Traversal probably reads all of these chunks. Like, I guess, generally, the order of these chunks may be related. Like, it may be reasonably ordered, I suppose, within a tablet. But I would think that it's probably, like, not always. Like, in some situations, it's impossible to order the physical data in these chunks. So it's, like, some arbitrary... In case of sorted tables, they are not ordered in any way. In case of ordered tables, they are ordered in natural order. Yes. Okay. Also, there is, like, journal root, which is just a plain list of journal chunks that are ordered. Yeah. Yeah. And they are also ordered. And also, there are some hunk structures, but they are actually very similar to ordered or sorted stuff. So we have... I don't remember how is it called. Let me see. Yeah, there is hunk root and hunk storage root and hunk tablet and blah, blah, blah for hunks. Yeah. Nothing very interesting. Okay. Mm-hmm. Actually, that's mostly it. So, like, it's also pretty interpretable in terms that, like, you can look for... Each element of chunk tree, what are its parents and what are its children. So you can, with simple traversing, like, reveal all the structure. Mm-hmm. Yes. So there are many tricky things near begin upload and end upload calls. I'm not sure, like, if I have some specific things to discuss there. It's just, like, important to understand that they exist. And these calls are very tightly related to chunk list structures. So basically, like, when you execute begin upload, you can see that the hunk is already ordered. So you execute begin upload, the new chunk list is typically generated. And all the uploaded chunks are attached to this newly created chunk list. And during the end upload, like, merge of the upload transaction, this new chunk list is being merged to the, like, to the table. Actually, that part is... I'm not sure I mentioned it in any other talk. Yeah. I don't know any other topics. But, like, there's definitely... I definitely mentioned stuff like begin upload or something like that. Yeah, but, like... Or, like, the different verbs. I don't know. No, I understand that you want to understand it. But, like, I'm not sure what exactly to tell about that. So the general mechanics of upload is not that, like, complex. Yes. So when you call begin upload and you upload transactions being started within this transaction, the new chunk list is created then. Yeah. And this chunk list is used to attach the newly created chunks to it. And when the end upload is executed, the upload transaction is trying to commit. And during its commit, this chunk list is assigned to the final destination. And in case if upload transaction aborts, this chunk list also removes. Yeah. Because basically we never create chunks in... Yeah, it's actually important to remember you have never chunks without a chunk list. Mm-hmm. All the time you create a chunk, it is being assigned to some chunk list. Interesting. I have actually... So let's maybe talk a little bit about, like, logs. So we have different kinds of logs. And, I mean, exclusive logs are not very interesting. But snapshot logs and... Yeah. And how they... In terms of chunk lists, what is the gist? Let's maybe... Oh, that's actually a nice question. And the real thing is that I don't remember, to be honest. We can also... We can leave this. So I think I mentioned logs. Yeah, we can leave it for the next session. It's a good question. Like, I need to... Yeah. Yeah. I think I need to remember that. Yeah. Yeah, I think this is one... I mean, bulk insert generally, I think, is pretty understandable. I mean, it's obviously... It's tricky, but I'm not the best person to ask about that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's try, let's go with bulk. Yeah. Yep. All right. Okay. So we have a chunk list and you... Yeah, I think... And this is... We have a chunk list here. What? Yeah. Yeah. This is... And this is... Okay. So this is... Look. Okay. Yeah. Yep. And rebalancing is like... It's a background, like there is a chunk list, I guess, balancer that... Let me check. Sometimes... Sometimes... Let me check. Sometimes... Sometimes, like, you... Let me check. For example, like, how does it... How does it, like, not interfere, for example, with, I don't know, rights, like, some exclusive rights? Let me see. First of all, seems like that... Okay, like, rebalancing chunk trees, of course, a persistent operation, because, like, how will you make it transient? I need to remember, actually, model of locks here, because I don't... Don't remember... Remember... Like, what is mutable and what is not. Okay. Mm-hmm. I think we can maybe stop here. Mm-hmm. If you can, please press stop recording. I want to discuss one more thing outside of the topic. All right. Yes. So... Okay. All right. So...
