Starting...
Loaded the model...
 Okay. Okay. So in general, so the purpose, I want to talk about two things. So first of all, in general, what is the path of certain, like, requests to YT, which touch different subsystems? This is important for coding and also for debugging, because often you need to understand, like, where something might have, could have gotten. Could have went wrong and so on. And the second part is to talk a little bit about code organization in general, where you can find some things. So first of all, in general, you're probably, like, seeing the picture. So the cluster, it has different, like, echelons of tiers of entry points. So you have, like, the cluster itself, as in, like, you have master. Well, actually, let's draw it like so. So you have the master server, which is, like, a cell of three peers that, let's say, primary master, that's a set of three peers that have consensus and that facilitate the code. And then you have the cluster that facilitates Cypress in general and stores metadata and so on and so on. You have data nodes. These are just, well, these are data nodes. There can be multiple racks of them, so on and so on. So there can be rack one. I don't know. Let's draw, like, this rack two. Doesn't really matter. You have... Now, the remainder is kind of not that obviously placed. I think let's place... So we have schedulers. They are, like, I don't know, three of them. And one is leading. And the other one... The other ones are, I don't know, how do you draw a sleeping... Fighting for logs. Fighting for logs and master or, like, what's it called? The other ones are, well, yeah, they're fighting for logs, but they're, like, not doing anything. So they're just sleeping pretty much. So let's look at their sleeping. And then there are controller agents, which... Are actually all doing something. I don't know. Let's... They're all doing something. They actually... They're sharded. I guess let's keep it. We'll add dynamic tables later. And there was somewhere exact nodes. Yeah. Also, there are exact nodes. So there is this whole compute part. There are, like, exact nodes. Here. And, well, they're actually... This is actually a marker. Any other markers? I think we have one. Maybe one from us. Yeah. Still a lot. So... Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Awesome. Let's see. Maybe one of those is good. And... Maybe the black one? Oh, the black one sounds pretty good. Okay. So now tablet nodes, I don't know, let's put them here. Let's put them here. Put... Okay. Okay. And now we can see what happens later. Well, the last one has a white one. So we got the white one. Okay. So this is a black one. This is a white one. So we got the black one. We got the white one. This is a black one. This is a black one. This is a black one. And this is a white one. Okay. Okay. By the way, so was this picture, I think this was discussed by Grisha in like with T101 a little bit. Yeah, mostly all of these components make sense. But am I right that like we didn't heavily discuss... I think so there was separate discussion about how tablet nodes do their thing or... I think in dynamic tables lecture he covered that pretty much. But my understanding is basically the tablet nodes are serving like a lot for dynamic tables for specific charts of these tables or tablets. Okay. Well, then I think that's fine. And it's pretty understandable what we need to cover. So... So, this is like the internal part of the cluster. And obviously, there is like a separate front of how the user... So the user is like somewhere here. And he wants to communicate or she or they want to communicate with the cluster. So, they have some client obviously here. And we have proxies. We have... For now, we have kind of two types of proxies. We'll add stuff later. So, we have HTTP proxies. And we have RPC proxies. We have... Here... We have... Here... Here... Here... We have a balancer on top of them. And this is what you see like, I don't know, playing... Wait... Wait... This is like that balancer. So, the typical path over the client, the initial one, is you come to this balancer. And then it gets complicated because in reality, there are two types of requests. Actually... So, here you have a decision tree. So, you actually have multiple types of requests already. So... For example, you have like HTTP requests and you actually have RPC requests. You mean RPC over HTTP? Yeah. So, that's the question. Because the client is usually generic. So, you take like, wait, Python client. You run, I don't know, like, client says, wait, I don't know. Right table. Or we say, I don't know, wait, list something. Boom. I don't know. So, these are, I mean, SDK requests. They can be served by different, for example, backends. So, most of our, like, our Python client has a configuration. And you can say backend equals like here in Python. You can say backend equals HTTP. Well, HTTP, I think, or something. But you can say backend equals RPC. And then it will use, like, inside Python, there is a thing called RPC driver. Which is pretty much C++ code, C++ driver embedded into, well, this Python lib that can communicate RPC properties. But what I want to start with is that the first point. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, the first point of entry to the cluster is the balance. So, in any of these protocols, you go to the balance. And then there are a few paths you can take. So, basically, an interesting request is, well, actually, there are multiple requests. But I don't know where to write it. But here, there's actually two methods. Like, we have this hosts. And we have discover proxies. Don't ask. So, both of these methods, these are just HTTP handles. So, they're implemented by HTTP proxies. But they're very lightweight. And they're just, like, you go to the balancer. And you typically ask either, like, for, like, the first one is used for HTTP. It returns a list of proxies. The second one is used for RPC. It returns a list of proxies. So, if we go with RPC. We ask for it. Like, discover proxies. We get a list of proxies. And then this RPC driver, it builds a connection of, like, it's balancing kind of channel over all of these RPC proxies. So, you go, like, here. I'm not sure how to draw it over the picture. You first go here. You get the list of proxies. And then you go to them directly. And you communicate with RPC proxies there. You're not going through the load balancer anymore. Yes. So, you make this, like, I need some other color for this, I guess. So, you make, like, a first request here. And then for RPC, you make a second request here. Okay. For HTTP, it depends. So, inside, like, our whole method kind of, there is a classification of basically light versus heavy. Okay. So, we have a list command. For example, like, list is a light command. And write table is a heavy command. Because write table writes data. So, and it is, it would be unwise to write data through the balancer. Because there are limits on that. And it will just get overloaded at the same kind of point. So, light commands are just proxied. So, like, you just go to the balancer and you say, like, plank yt-nevus-yt slash list. And then you pass the parameters for HTTP. And that's it. So, it just, well, it picks the peer and then it just executes the command. For heavy commands, you have the same kind of pattern. You first go to the balancer for, like, hosts. So, this is, like, the first thing. And then you go directly to some, you pick some HTTP. And then you go directly to it. So, that's why, like, this, you see this in logs. If you, like, were open, like, if you start running debug logs of the Python client. You see that you first make a request to hosts. To the balancer. And then you make, like, execute some proxy blah, blah, blah, 45 slash write table. And that's where you send your data. And that was quite interesting. Yeah. So, why select proxy? Does it do something smart? Or is it just select random? So, these calls, the smart parts are inside the implementation. So, hosts, by default, lists them in some order of load. So, there's some concept of load on proxies. And it turns, like, the top ones are the ones with the least load. So, that's how it picks. For RPC. So, that's how it picks. And, I don't remember. There might have been some improvements. There are also approaches when, like, you can try to pick multiple. And, anyway, so it depends on how low you want to go. Because RPC, historically, is more for dynamic tables. Like, it has just been used more with dynamic tables. And because of that, it has some intrinsics of dynamic tables sometimes around there. And, anyway. So, what I'm saying is that, like, with RPC proxies, you often work not through Python. Python is kind of not the popular. You might work via C++. And then there was, like, actually, there are a few RPC clients for C++, too. And there, you might want to, like, in C++, there are some things, like, I don't know, there's a hedging client that, like, tries to pick the most common ones. Like, tries to build two, like, send the requests into a few connections and stuff like that. So, there's just more complicated client-side work in C++ if you wanted. But that's a gist, I think. That's questions. Maybe another question. Like, typically, like, where does HTTPS termination happen? Like, does it happen on the load balancer? Or can it go with HTTPS query to the proxy directly? And it's... So, you can go to the... So, basically, yeah, we can terminate HTTPS on proxies directly. They have certificates and stuff like that. So, basically, depending, like, all of this depends on basically whether here you write, like, HTTP or if you write the S in the configuration of the, like, wiki proxy, it will choose. Also, logic is somewhat imperfect. In some places, it's just... Yes. So, that's, like, the entry. And that's how you get to proxies. So, in terms of protocol, HTTP is just HTTP. Nothing special. Nothing special anymore, I guess, at this point. RPC use our... We have, like, our RPC protocol. So, data is sent somehow over wire. Like, there are protocols. I mean, but it's our own implementation of RPC servers. So, we don't... What is important that this is not gRPC. Got it. We actually do have gRPC proxies. I think they're, like, half dead. Like, they... There is... They existed. I don't think anyone maintains or supports them. I don't know if they work right now. But we can, like, write a lib. There is a tombstone. Or a gRPC proxy. I don't know. Yeah, it's pretty much... 2000. I don't know what. 1920. Some year. I actually don't know when they finished or when they started. It might be completely wrong here. But they're pretty dead. There are probably some other things I'll remember later. If I have time at all. I hope we won't get kicked out of writing here. But we'll see. So, this is how we get to proxies. And it's important what happens next-ish, kind of. So... The next question is how do proxies interact with the cluster? So, and it is in pretty much, like, the same fashion. So, here... This layer is facilitated basically by something called the native client. So, it lives... So... Pretty much in terms of code. Like, there is... I don't know where to write it. But there is, like, wait... There is waitee... Waitee client, I think, is the general lib. Which has interfaces for just waitee clients. Including, for example, the, like... The internal or PC client, kind of? Basically, it's a stupid inheritance of different things. But... So, there is a primitive... So, there is an interface for waitee clients. That is shared by both the native client. And native client is a very low-level client. It is kind of a very proxy-like client. So, if you just take this client, you can kind of become a proxy for waitee. You can execute... I'll kind of... We'll talk about this later. But you can, for example, like, execute a lot of operations. And the point is that... The interface is shared with, for example, the implementation over the RPC client. Which is in C++. So, basically, this... In here, you will find, like, a client which has methods. Like, I don't know, list, right? That has, like, a lot of C++ methods for interacting with waitee. Like, list, right table, all of these. You'll find, like, you can start transactions. You can interact with... There are interfaces for all of that. And we... Like, both the RPC client and the native client, they all follow the same interface. So, basically... It is like a kind of a stack of things. So, here... Like, if we... Like, here, we interact with... Like, the RPC client. With... Which follows this interface. And then inside the RPC proxy, it pretty much just, like, proxies it to the same interface. Like, to the native client, which has, like, the same methods. Which communicates with the cluster. So... Yeah. Basically, this means that methods are translated kind of one-to-one. Like, we have right table there, right table there. Yes. So, for RPC, that's the case. So, for... So, here, you have the translation layer. Here is called the... So, the translation layer, I guess. So, there isn't, like... We can kind of extend this and say that here, there is, like, native client. And the translation layer between... In, like, the HTTP. I mean, the box should be shifted because the native client is big. So, the translation is called the HTTP driver. So, basically, we take the HTTP parameters and we kind of put them into... So, there's actually a code that parses HTTP commands. Yeah. And then calls methods of the native client. But just to make sure I understand it correctly. So, if that was the case that you have, like, a complicated query, let's say, which is then executed by several of the... Yeah. Or is it... Very, like, almost never. Almost never. So, basically, in terms of code, this translation layer, I don't remember the start path, but there is basically, like, driver, like, table commands, commands... Yeah, yeah. Commands.cpp. And, like, so there are a lot of, like, files, like, driver, something, commands.cpp, which basically have the implementation of all commands. And the typical implementation of a command is parse the parameter, like, list command. It just takes the parameters that it defines, and then it just... Well, the protobuf moving company comes in, and we just, like, call the same method in the C++, like, native client. That's the typical thing. I think there might be some exceptions, but not really. Not really. Yes. Right. Table is a... Table is one of the more complicated things, actually. So... But... You can read that later. Basically, write table is more... Ugh. Is more... Let's think about it later. Anyway. So... Then the native client is the one that basically... Yeah. The one that basically does the real heavy lifting. So, this is the proxy code that, for example, like, I don't know, you want to... Well, you are writing data. So, you need to... I don't know. Like, you need to go to master and say that I'm creating... So, like, I don't know. Like, you're creating something, right? Yeah. I don't know. Well, I don't know. I'm confident that I'm creating something. For example, write table, which I guess at this point is... The problem is that this is, like, a streaming request, but more or less, you can say that write table is employed... There is a class called table writer in our clients, in, like, all C++ kind of ish clients. So, kind of write table just starts the... Like, it just starts... You call write table, it calls create table writer, and then you stream data to it, and at some point it kind of finishes. And while you stream it, it just... Yeah. It just... I mean, we are like... Basically this is one of those places where you need HTTP streaming, so you stream the data to a specific proxy across this path, and it just gets kind of written into the table writer, and the table writer internally does things. And table writer is kind of also part of native client. It's a bit different than this one of the examples where it's slightly different from just calling the command. But I don't know. Maybe we can pick... Let's first pick a command that is kind of simpler to think about. Attach table. Well, attach table is not simple, but let's pick concatenate, which is kind of... It does something, but it's kind of simpler. It's pretty simple. So there is a concatenate command, which takes two tables and joins them in terms of metadata. So basically it creates a third table, or you specify the destination, and it creates it by joining the chunk lists of these tables. So here, this is pretty much like... This is just master interaction. So the native client implements this. It, I don't know, takes the two tables. It goes to master, and it asks, like, hey, give me the chunks of these two tables. Then it, well, I don't know, merges... Well, then it creates like a single list, and then it kind of sends... Creates a new table and tells master, hey, this new table. I'm like... I'm going to upload it. Like, these are the chunks you should attach to it without actually uploading any data. What's important to understand is this is a dangerous client and a dangerous protocol. As you can see, the native client... And I forgot to tell about the code, so I think it's waity, waity... I'm blanking here. But in general, the key words here are waity lib. So everything you see actually in waity lib is kind of native client plain. And there is, like, basically the actual client, there is a directory called native, and then there's, like, client CPP, transaction stuff, and then basically most commands are implemented in files like... The dynamic table. The dynamic table. The dynamic table. The dynamic table. The dynamic table. And then the table owner is, for example, like, client dynamic table, impulse, CPP, or something like that. So there are a bunch of those files. So there are Cypress, so there are files pretty much like the subsystem, impulse, CPP, inside, like, these directories that implement the actual commands like concatenate. Yes. And just so to understand that, let's say we talk about concatenate requests and this is all, like, it should actually... Yeah. ...get meta information about a channel from master, like, join it and write a new table. Yeah. It sounds like several calls. Yes. So those calls are happening, like, from a proxy, right? Or, like... Yes. Okay. Yes. And we die, like, the request is kind of just waiting and... Yes. Yeah. Okay. Got it. Got it. So most of the requests are, like, synchronous. So we have some stream... The data requests often are streaming. Yeah. So, like, HTTP streaming, blah, blah, blah, but there are some complications, but in general, yeah, for simple requests, they're synchronous. The proxy is the one that's actually executing it and, yeah, so... And it's quite low level communication because basically the native client is the one that, for example, like, it needs to get something from master. Well, what does it do? It takes, like... It has a config. Like, we have a configuration where you can find the kind of addresses of masters. And it takes, like, them and it builds... There's like a kind of channel primitive to communicate with masters. Why do you need, like, a primitive? Because you want to, I don't know, talk to the leader or the follower or, like, some kind of state. So there is logic that basically you go to masters and they tell you kind of who they are. This is usually... The keywords here are, like, channel and services over channels. So the typical pattern inside a native client is you take the channel to some service, like, some component, like, masters or data nodes or, like, this specific data node. And then over channels, you can, like, you can instantiate, I guess, like, RPCs or something. Yeah. Yeah. So you can call RPC service proxies over channels. So you say that, okay, I want to call, like, this RPC method over this channel. And that's what you do with masters. You say, like, I want to call, I don't know, get, like, get basic attribute, like, some kind of sort of RPC method that is implemented by... So master has a bunch of RPC services. There is, like, I don't know. There is chunk service. Service. There is object service, which deals with, like, sidequests service. And a bunch of others. And this is where you... So this is native client goes to these RPC services and calls some RPC methods that return results. There is, like, wide path service. That handles... Well, path stuff. Anyway. There are a bunch of them. And all of these other components also have some sort of RPC services. That's how they interact. Yes. So, for example, once again, like, concatenate, it has to get the attributes of these tables, get the chunk lists. In more difficult situations, it actually has to, like, transfer stuff. That's what's called teleporting. So, like, if you have multi-stable. If you have multi-cell where, like, chunks... Once chunks can start living on different cells, sometimes you need to transfer them from, like, one cell to another. There are also, like, caveats with portals. That's why the code, like, if you open concatenate, which is client Cypress simple CPP, I think it is in there. Concatenation code is quite complicated. Grisha wrote it some time ago. I copied it a few times. There is a lot of primitives going around there. And once again, because I have made these mistakes, these are, like, this is dangerous in general. So, a sad story of the beginning of exports from dynamic tables, which I'm not sure you know. But we implemented the functionality that if you basically... We have queues, which are, well, ordered dynamic tables. Their chunks are actually the same as static table chunks. So they're not special. They're not for it. So we had this idea, which was a very good one, I mean, in respect. Now we use it heavily with logging. Let's make a periodic process. That, like, takes the... 10.5. Right. So we have a tail of chunks and creates a static table from these same chunks, without copying. So you like... You take the same chunks and you just create, like, a snapshot of it. And then this way... So you can configure daily exports that, like, they go every day. Like at midnight, you go and you take another portion of chunks and you, like, form, you build a table. of from these chunks. Now you have a static table that is like the partition for this date, kind of. And we use this right now heavily in logging. That's how they write logs. So they have a kind of ingestion queue, daily experts, and then you can trim, after you did the experts, you can trim the queue. And this way, like, why is this good? It's because it allows you to partition data because working with a huge queue is just inefficient. Like, our kind of data primitives are not very optimized for, like, please read me, like, one day from this year-long queue. Also, our queues never were intended for storing huge amounts of data. Like, they have limits on the number of chunks inside one tablet. So anyway, this is a whole other story. But, it has proven useful. But the beginnings of this feature were done by an intern who is by Dasha, who is working in the master team right now. So I was young and kind of naïve-ish, and we said, hey, so this code looks very similar to concatenate. And let's base it on concatenate. And we started writing, like, the we started writing the code, and I was like, well, I think we kind of got so let's take, like, the native client. Let's take, like, the code that we wrote for, like, looking at chunks of the dynamic table and building and use, like, static table from these chunks. Now, let's run it on a testing cluster. Like, let's take the native, like, you can, like, this is how the user enters. But you can go and you can build the native client. You can get, like, a binary with a native client. Maybe back also on your Yandex days, some teams were using native clients for some purposes. It was eradicated, like, by the time I got to Yandex, it was eradicated. But you, we can build a native client. And you have to, like, kind of pass it the right config. It needs to know, like, pretty much, like, a server-like config. But you can do that, as well. And, then, you can, kind of, like, use it on your computer with a closed-root coding. So, you know, you can kind of become a proxy as well. Actually, our proxy binaries have a flag that is remote cluster proxy. So you can build HTV proxy and run it with the flag remote cluster proxy and pass, I think, just the balancer address. And it will go and download the config it needs to connect and basically run as a proxy locally. So you just run this process, but locally because all you need is a native client with the proper configuration. Does this mean that you will like to say master directly from? Yes. Okay. Yes. And it's not going to... Okay. Got it. So don't you need to get network access to this? Yes. Okay. So this is on a recording saying that this is actually, this is like the main security vulnerability of WT right now that you need like authentication finishes here. So like past this level, there is no real authentication. Like the only authentic, like you just identify yourself as the user. Like native client, you just say user equals whatever. And that's it. You don't provide any credentials. Mm-hmm. So, yeah. So authentication happens here. And so if you go and build a native client and you have network, like in order for it to work, you need network access to our PC ports of all of these services. If you have it, you can do whatever. You can say your route. It doesn't like... Okay. There is no way to distinguish you from the cluster itself. But that's why you need to protect it. And that's why actually in an ideal world, you need mTLS and we actually... Yeah. Almost enabled that. So we're kind of protected-ish. Mm-hmm. But I don't know. But anyway. But let's say it's actually testing cluster. We don't care about that. Yeah. So anyway, obviously, we can build a native client. And that's what we did. And we're like, well, we have this like code that is similar to concatenate. Let's try to run it. Yeah. Which is a bad idea. Don't do it. Because, well, it turns out that, well, it's easy to make mistakes there. And they can be very dangerous. So it was... So I think we forgot. So the bug was that in one of the actions, it was forgotten to do it, like, to say that it's done in a transaction. So like, this is done in a transaction. And then one of the kind of actions with chunks. Mm-hmm. So like, this is done in a transaction. And then one of the kind of actions with chunks. Mm-hmm. And then one of the kind of actions with chunks. It was forgotten. Like, Dasha forgot to label it with a transaction. And some sort of ref counts. So basically, something mixed up. And I don't know. Like, the testing cluster, the master team spent like five, six hours recovering this testing cluster. Basically, like, chunks ended up in a very weird state. A few chunks. And a lot of time was spent recovering them. And people were not happy. But anyway. Anyway, the point is that, like, Native Client is very low level. And it doesn't protect you from doing weird things with the cluster state. Especially when it concerns master stuff. If you, like, ask it to move some chunks and forget to specify something, it might move them. Like, obviously, they try to validate stuff. But it's not perfect. Moral of the story, if you're doing stuff like this, obviously, start with, like, a cluster. With integration tests. Don't, like, the only so kind of my rule, go to rule from now on, is that, like, you can only run Native Client code on the cluster that is, like, basically only existing methods. So if, like, anything similar, like, remote cluster proxy plus epsilon is fine. Like, obviously, if you this is actually, like, convenient. For debugging something in a proxy. Like, you can start a remote cluster proxy. And then you say you kind of, like, you then use the SDK to run the request into yourself, into your own local proxy. You just specify it directly. You can do that. And now you can, I don't know, add some debug logging. And you will see, like, in your process of the proxy, hey, this is, like, something is going on. Or you can kind of tweak it a little bit. But basically, don't do any, like, don't test new commands. Just kind of... Don't test it, like, on a real cluster. Yeah, yeah. Don't test it on a real cluster before you tested it on, like, locally. You wrote integration tests. It makes perfect sense. But basically, it is, like, in retrospect, it makes perfect sense. But it's very easy to confuse, like, the Native Client and what it gives you with just a regular client. Because it kind of has the same interface in principle. And it is not the same. Okay. Yes. Yeah. Now, question. That was a long detour, which, I mean, I guess is useful for just understanding. But was it useful? Anyway. Questions. Yeah, yeah. Like, let's say we talk about this continuing method. It's doing a bunch of complicated stuff there. And I can imagine, like, there might be some sort of, I don't know, races there. Like, you get... Yeah. Chunk leads and tables got deleted at that time. Yeah. That's why, obviously, like, it doesn't just get these, but it takes logs. So concatenation, I think, takes snapshot logs for input and exclusive log for output. And this is also important. So, for instance, you need to, like, start a transaction. Yeah. Then you take the logs. Then you get all this. So, it gets pretty complicated. This is all inside the way you live. And that's why... Yeah. For example, like, attach table, the implementation also lives inside where you live. This is something executed in the proxies. And it's actually kind of similar to these, all of these commands, because it creates chunks with, like, it doesn't write data. So, it creates chunk and then it builds kind of a table out of these chunks, but it doesn't actually write any data. This way, it's similar to concatenate. It is similar to exports, which are also used, like, manipulate chunks. Oops. There are actually not that many places that manipulate chunks. That's what I'm saying. Yes. So, we can discuss a few things here. Some commands are, you know, more complicated. So, write table is actually not that complicated. It's just streaming. So, basically, like, the start of the... I don't remember the code, but basically, as I said, like, the start of the command just creates the table writer. It's a kind of stateful class that can ingest data. Then HTTP streaming just sends data to this class. And internally, well, it does what you would expect. It's, like, looks at the table and says, hey, master, like, I want to... I need to, like, create a chunk. Mm-hmm. And the master... Master says, okay, well, awesome. Here is where you should put it. Like, here is the chunk ID, and here are the replicas in one of the knowledge exchanges, which I think you were known there for. Grisha was, like, explaining this part of master. There's, like, a chunk kind of... I forgot that there is a service that is responsible for, like, saying which nodes you should place the chunk on. Master, like, it's... So you go with, like, I don't know, create chunk. You get it back. You get replicas. And that also happens under some transactional, all of it. Whenever it gives you back chunk, like, learn as it belong to... Yeah, that happens under transactions. This reference made a transaction and then it ends up... Actually, I don't want to lie, so maybe Grisha will share knowledge. You can read the code. Like, in general, in general, I guess I think chunks are referenced just by the transaction before they, like, once the object is created, before it's actually linked to a chunk list. So if the transaction dies, I think it gets just deleted after that. Although, actually, I don't think you can actually create a chunk without a chunk list. So maybe it gets added straight away. So maybe. I don't remember. Yeah, I don't think it's that important. There are a lot of tricky things here. But so you need, like, whenever you, like, touch this code, you need to consider these kind of things. But all in all, yeah, you create a chunk, then you know the replicas, you basically go and write the data directly to data nodes. So I think this is important to mention that we, like, we use the proxies. They first talk with master, then they write data. They write data to data nodes. And then basically data nodes in heartbeats will kind of tell master, hey, I got this replica, and that's how master will figure out, hey, this chunk has all of its replicas. Actually, there is a lot of data in here. So I think that's a good thing. Yeah. So, yeah, I think that's a good thing. But, I mean, that's generally the process. And then, I don't know, there are a bunch of other, so, like, requests have different lives. So let's kind of go through some categories. So master requests, they're very, I don't know, concatenate, list, set. They all go pretty much to master. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What's important to note here is that we actually have more services. So there is a thing called, which should kind of be drawn here, but for lack of space, I will just point it like this. So there is master cache, which is just service for caching master requests. It's just a cache. So it's just, like, so it's a standalone, like, service. Yeah. Yeah. So it's just a cache. So it's a, it's a standalone number of instances that you go through to, well, to lighten the load on masters. Obviously, you lose some kind of consistency, depending, like, obviously, you cannot have consistency here. But that's fine in many cases, just allows to decrease the load from masters. It's just access proxy. Like, there is a, you know, there's a proxy in cache in code. I think it's just like a sync. We have a lot of caches inside. I even, at some point, I think I want your name, my, like, our team or like stuff we were doing in Yandex, like the cache development team, because like you write a lot of caches, but it's just like another proxy in between proxies and master. Um, whatever. What else? So, they typically go to either straight to master or through master cache. Write stuff has to go to the leader. Um, reads are done from followers, mostly. What else? They are data, like, data path requests. Actually write tables, the harder, like, we should have started with read. Read retailer table is the easier one. You first, go to master. It's a user request called fetch. And it's actually used frequently. That's the request. There is the request you use to you tell the master, hey, I want to read this table. I want to read these ranges of this table. Please tell me which chunks I should read. And kind of where they are. And if I only need like a part of this chunk, kind of tell me what part. And it gives you this response. And then you go and read it from the data node. But in all static table interactions, you need to make a master request. So they all go through master initially. And actually, I don't think we can't cache this really because, well, you can take logs and stuff like that. But it's fine. Okay. So then MapReduce stuff goes, okay, I don't want to lie, but somewhere in this area. So these services, there is obviously a separate lecture, but scheduler is responsible for like distributing the resources. Controller agent responsible for like facilitating the operation, telling, hey, so the controller agent goes to the scheduler and says, hey, this is the controller agent. And the scheduler says, okay, I need to schedule a job with this amount of resources. And the scheduler says, okay, well, hey, you can like schedule it there. So that's their interaction. And then they go to exec nodes. So MapReduce stuff, I think, so I don't think proxies interact with exec nodes much, even though I barely read that code. Maybe only four logs. Or like some introspection. So they probably go to, I don't remember, like one of those services, probably controller agent, but I'm not sure, has like an RPC method that's like start operation. So that's where MapReduce goes. And then it's kind of, yeah. Isn't that coming to master as well? Like doesn't master of like all, it doesn't have all information about running operations, right? It comes. It comes. It kind of has. So operations are persistent through Cypress. So well, I don't know. I think it's, I think it's the controller agent that does this, but sorry, I just don't know. Okay. Okay. Oh, someone, maybe even proxies, maybe even like the native client, but I'm not sure. So someone like creates the node in Cypress that corresponds to the operation. So it takes some transactions. That's why I think it's controller agent because controller agent is the one that has all these transactions because the operation has like a bunch of transactions. It has like input transaction, output, it has some coordination, like there are a few of them. So I think basically like probably the controller agent creates this node in Cypress. Yeah. And then, well, yeah. So information is persistent there. It is the one responsible for snapshotting. So like we have operation snapshots, which kind of save what we, what we process, like what jobs finished and basically like what was processed. Yeah. So I think. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So I think the, another important like kind of code structure understanding thing is that in like these components talk to each other as well. And they talk to each other often using the same native client. Like, I mean, also talk using the native client, native like client and native clients was like native protocol. That's called, that's the two terms here. So if a scheduler is like going to a, master. It also uses this same protocol for talking to it. There is some kind of, and in general, everything is wrapped into a suit. Native client is very specific methods heavy. Like there are some weird methods for interacting, like for scheduler controller agent interaction. There are some weird methods for controller agent exec notes interaction. There are weird methods for dynamic tables. There are weird methods that I wrote for queues. So like, I don't know. So there are a bunch of kind of, it's like maybe in an ideal world, it could be kind of separated into separate kind of interfaces. It kind of already is. So Max Bavienka started some things, but still there are kind of specifics here and there. But yeah. I mean, it's quite similar. So that's how the internal interaction looks and how the external interaction looks. So yeah, that's code placement. The actual code for the, so like in general, our rules are that like components go into YTYT server. So everything that's inside one component goes into YTYT server. It's not included like anywhere else. Sometimes you have shared code between components. And I think for that, there's like YTYT server lib. If anything kind of crosses like this boundary, it goes into YTYT lib. And that's why kind of a lot of stuff is reused both inside here and here. Like, because if it's needed here, it starts living here and then it's still obviously used inside the server code. But so kind of the movement, the movement, the movement, the movement of code is this way. If you consider that here is YTLib and here is actually YTYT client, which can, because some stuff and some like definitions, some classes, some like command options, for example, they are available like to the public publicly. The C++ client has obviously exposed the symbols. So code tends to move in this direction once it kind of starts getting used more, exposed more. That's how it goes. Let's see. Well, dynamic tables. Let's stop at this point. Any questions? I mean, yeah, you can talk about dynamic tables, but also I had a question about like you mentioned this config for like for proxies generally. Like, generally, what is there like master nodes, hosts? Pretty much. Yeah, you need a master host. That's the most important thing. And why master, like, why is there is no like some sort of discovery mechanism for master or like from where? Yeah. That's why like technically speaking, like the actually a lot of components, like how you can run a remote cluster proxy, it goes like basically this config lives in the, you can run a remote cluster proxy in Sys slash at cluster connection. So like the term cluster connection kind of means that it's a special kind of config and you can also find as config in actual like czasie files is basically what you need to connect to a cluster. And so you can discover this config from the cluster from Cypress. But obviously that is, I mean, well, We could have built, like, I think now you could write a system where most components don't actually need to know the, like, master hosts. But, like, they start with going to the balancer and asking master directly. Well, then you need HTTP proxy. So, like, basically everything except HTTP proxies, I guess, could discover these hosts through the balancer. But then you kind of go into what if HTTP proxies are dead, what are, like, dependencies here. And at this point, it's just, like, master addresses for most components are just provided statically. That's what it is. But in such case, let's say, like, one node, we want to replace one node. So, in this case, master is possible to do without, like, restarting the cluster. Well, eh. I mean, you still need to replace masters. So, but you're right that basically you kind of need to restart. Like, if you replace a master host, you kind of need to roll everything. Let's just put it this way. It is, the current state is, like, somewhere in between. It can be improved. There's a question where it needs to be improved. But, so, you're right that it can be done. It can be reconfigured dynamically. It is not always so. And I'm kind of saying it was more rarely so. But, and for example, our operator, it builds these configs. If you change it in our operator, it will try to update all components. Right? So, it will, like, build a diff in all of them. In configs. So, that's just what it is. But it is something that can be fixed if needed. Yeah, yeah. That's probably the question. Yeah, no, I think it's a good question, actually. So, it is. And cluster connection is an important thing in general. For example, that's what allows, like, not just it, but there is also sysclusters, which is a map of kind of known clusters. And that's what allows clusters to connect to each other. Because we have, like, remote copy operation, which pretty much just runs. It's pretty nifty. Because it just runs on the destination cluster. And inside itself, I think on the destination, inside itself, it just creates a native client. As it would, but not to your own cluster, but to another cluster. And then you just use the config. You have it in this cluster, in the destination cluster. In Cypress, you have the config. You need to connect to some other cluster. And then just start reading data from it. And the funny thing is that the remote copy will go to another cluster's master, ask for where the chunks are, and then go to other cluster's data nodes. So, it needs, like, obviously, the network connections and stuff. But it's a pretty, it is pretty powerful, but also pretty dangerous. Because in Yandex, we had F. At some point, it was a shared kind of thing. Like, everyone knew each other. And after a fuck-up where very, very testing cluster, like, started, there was a wooden check. That check remote copy, a full mesh remote copy. And that check, like, just broke all clusters. Because, well, I mean, when you release something like this, that means that a new, like, you can update, like, this one cluster. And to a new major version. It'll start using the newer code to go to the other cluster with the older version. Which is actually, so, this is an important topic, is versioning. And it's just shit. So, basically, Native Client is backward compatible-ish for, like, one major version at least. But usually a few more. So, typical paradigm is if you take... Native Client out to the future, you can use it to call older ones. But I think the other... So, let's see. Let's see. Yeah. Because that's how updates usually go, for example. So, masters are updated last. So, you start with proxies. So, once you update proxies, they will have, like, new Native Client. Which will... Like, make requests to old masters. Well, they need to support. So, that's because of how the update goes. That's, like, you need to write code so that this works. That's why, like, in this direction, it's fine. In the other direction, well... I mean, it's also fine because, for example, you have remote copy. But that kind of means that, basically, some parts of the protocol are stable. Like, we try to keep them stable. Otherwise, things don't work out. But it's not very strict. And there have been, like, moments in history where, well, it turns out that, like, there is some bug here. And this is... Well, now we need to kind of write some compatibility code to fix it. Especially, this is important because, actually, let's talk about in the five minutes that we have before, I think, the next knowledge exchange. Yes. Where I'm not talking. Thankfully. We have more stuff. We have... Where do they live? Let's put them somewhere here. We have... And... And... And... And... I'm not sure. But maybe we can place the EQ here. But I'm not 100% sure. And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... And... Yt tables. So instead of merge3, we have our own kind of backend storage. So it's a binary that contains click-ups and contains Yt code, more specifically this part of Yt libcode. Because how is it implemented? It's implemented on top of the native protocol, not the external client. And just to clarify, because I don't know this part much, like, this leaves on some separate backends which are more or less stateless, or do they have, like, actual data kind of pulled somewhere? Like, if it's a matter of maybe it doesn't. I'm not sure. So ClickHouse, I was kind of getting to it. Basically, there is an implementation that takes and implements, like, this Yt storage backend for ClickHouse. Yeah. This implementation is done on top of, like, the native protocol for some kind of historical, some nonhistorical reasons, because it actually, like, it does optimizations similar to what controller agents would do. Great shot. Yeah. We have three minutes. So it does optimizations similar to what SQL agents would do. So that's, like, we operate with kind of chunk, like, with pools. We kind of skip some chunks, something like that. So it uses that. And it lives inside vanilla. We have a certain type of operations. We just compute. So it's just, like, binary vanilla operations. And then so that's where cheat lives. So but basically, this is kind of a proxy. So basically, it's a kind of proxy that lives inside of the Yt. So, like, when you interact with the cheats, you, like, HTTP proxies, they go here, even though this is, like, kind of, like, you have a few operations in Yt, so click, there is, like, they are called clicks. Is that, like, forever running? Yes. Yes. So this click, actually, I'm not sure how to pronounce click in English. Click, whatever. Actually, click, probably. So, they are basically forever running vanilla operations that just host this ClickHouse binary. They expose some HTTP, like they expose some interface on exact nodes ports, basically. And then our proxies know about this and they discover them through discovery, which we have discovery. We have a bunch of different ways to do discovery, actually. So, HTTP proxies, they discover where those endpoints are where the ClickHouse binary is exposing itself. And it goes there and says, hey, I'm executing this ClickHouse request. And the fun part here begins when you try to kind of understand what code is around here. What is the versioning here? Because ClickHouse chit has its own stable branches that are diverging here, and it is a good way to get the code out of the way. And then when you try to kind of understand what code is running here. Like, what's the versioning here? Because ClickHouse, like, cheat has its own stable branches that are diverging. Obviously, it's a very complex code. But that's not something that's going to be solved today. So, HTC Proxies is running on the root of the source code. And then it's running on the root of the source code. derive that basically sometimes are separate. So basically right now we have 24.2, but the ClickHouse we're running is in the future in terms of like native client. It's actually fewer in the future, which in some cases can actually pose some, well, not threats, but it's like, so that's why it's kind of important not to kind of be too far back or you might be stuck even in ClickHouse versioning. And I don't know, like there are other, like different components follow someone different. Like all of this is released from WT stable versions, but like for example, there's Square Tracker, which is released from its own releases as well. So you have to be, the point is, you have to kind of be careful and let's put it frankly, this is not the best kind of best, not the part of our system is managed in the best way. So like, it's quite a complicated topic. There are different directions. Like for example, after the whole fuck up with, now we're, I think that's good enough. So I will tell stories later, but.
